<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>From the Heights</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="from-the-heights" epub:type="part">
			<h2 epub:type="title">From the Heights</h2>
			<div epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3>1</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Midday of Life! Oh, season of delight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">My summer’s park!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uneaseful joy to look, to lurk, to hark⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I peer for friends, am ready day and night⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where linger ye, my friends? The time is right!</span>
				</p>
				<h3>2</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Is not the glacier’s grey today for you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Rose-garlanded?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brooklet seeks you, wind, cloud, with longing thread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thrust themselves yet higher to the blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To spy for you from farthest eagle’s view.</span>
				</p>
				<h3>3</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My table was spread out for you on high⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Who dwelleth so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Star-near, so near the grisly pit below?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My realm⁠—what realm hath wider boundary?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My honey⁠—who hath sipped its fragrancy?</span>
				</p>
				<h3>4</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Friends, ye are there! Woe me⁠—yet I am not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He whom ye seek?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye stare and stop⁠—better your wrath could speak!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am not I? Hand, gait, face, changed? And what</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am, to you my friends, now am I not?</span>
				</p>
				<h3>5</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Am I an other? Strange am I to Me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet from Me sprung?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wrestler, by himself too oft self-wrung?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hindering too oft my own self’s potency,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wounded and hampered by self-victory?</span>
				</p>
				<h3>6</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I sought where-so the wind blows keenest. There</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I learned to dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where no man dwells, on lonesome ice-lorn fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unlearned Man and God and curse and prayer?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Became a ghost haunting the glaciers bare?</span>
				</p>
				<h3>7</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ye, my old friends! Look! Ye turn pale, filled o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With love and fear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go! Yet not in wrath. Ye could ne’er live here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here in the farthest realm of ice and scaur,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A huntsman must one be, like chamois soar.</span>
				</p>
				<h3>8</h3>
				<p>
					<span>An evil huntsman was I? See how taut</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">My bow was bent!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strongest was he by whom such bolt were sent⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woe now! That arrow is with peril fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perilous as none.⁠—Have yon safe home ye sought!</span>
				</p>
				<h3>9</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ye go! Thou didst endure enough, oh, heart;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Strong was thy hope;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto new friends thy portals widely ope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let old ones be. Bid memory depart!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wast thou young then, now⁠—better young thou art!</span>
				</p>
				<h3>10</h3>
				<p>
					<span>What linked us once together, one hope’s tie⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(Who now doth con</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those lines, now fading, Love once wrote thereon?)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is like a parchment, which the hand is shy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To touch⁠—like crackling leaves, all seared, all dry.</span>
				</p>
				<h3>11</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! Friends no more! They are⁠—what name for those?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Friends’ phantom-flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knocking at my heart’s windowpane at night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazing on me, that speaks “We were” and goes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, withered words, once fragrant as the rose!</span>
				</p>
				<h3>12</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Pinings of youth that might not understand!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For which I pined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which I deemed changed with me, kin of my kind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they grew old, and thus were doomed and banned:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None but new kith are native of my land!</span>
				</p>
				<h3>13</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Midday of life! My second youth’s delight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">My summer’s park!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unrestful joy to long, to lurk, to hark!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I peer for friends!⁠—am ready day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my new friends. Come! Come! The time is right!</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<h3>14</h3>
				<p>
					<span>This song is done⁠—the sweet sad cry of rue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sang out its end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wizard wrought it, he the timely friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The midday-friend⁠—no, do not ask me who;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At midday ’twas, when one became as two.</span>
				</p>
				<h3>15</h3>
				<p>
					<span>We keep our Feast of Feasts, sure of our bourne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Our aims selfsame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Guest of Guests, friend Zarathustra, came!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world now laughs, the grisly veil was torn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Light and Dark were one that wedding-morn.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
