<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV: Apophthegms and Interludes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Apophthegms and Interludes</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-4-63" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">63</h3>
				<p>He who is a thorough teacher takes things seriously⁠—and even himself⁠—only in relation to his pupils.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-64" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">64</h3>
				<p>“Knowledge for its own sake”⁠—that is the last snare laid by morality: we are thereby completely entangled in morals once more.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-65" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">65</h3>
				<p>The charm of knowledge would be small, were it not so much shame has to be overcome on the way to it.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-65a" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">65A</h3>
				<p>We are most dishonourable towards our God: he is not <em>permitted</em> to sin.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-66" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">66</h3>
				<p>The tendency of a person to allow himself to be degraded, robbed, deceived, and exploited might be the diffidence of a God among men.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-67" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">67</h3>
				<p>Love to one only is a barbarity, for it is exercised at the expense of all others. Love to God also!</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-68" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">68</h3>
				<p>“I did that,” says my memory. “I could not have done that,” says my pride, and remains inexorable. Eventually⁠—the memory yields.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-69" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">69</h3>
				<p>One has regarded life carelessly, if one has failed to see the hand that⁠—kills with leniency.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-70" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">70</h3>
				<p>If a man has character, he has also his typical experience, which always recurs.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-71" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">71</h3>
				<p><i>The Sage as Astronomer.</i>⁠—So long as thou feelest the stars as an “above thee,” thou lackest the eye of the discerning one.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-72" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">72</h3>
				<p>It is not the strength, but the duration of great sentiments that makes great men.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-73" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">73</h3>
				<p>He who attains his ideal, precisely thereby surpasses it.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-73a" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">73A</h3>
				<p>Many a peacock hides his tail from every eye⁠—and calls it his pride.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-74" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">74</h3>
				<p>A man of genius is unbearable, unless he possess at least two things besides: gratitude and purity.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-75" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">75</h3>
				<p>The degree and nature of a man’s sensuality extends to the highest altitudes of his spirit.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-76" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">76</h3>
				<p>Under peaceful conditions the militant man attacks himself.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-77" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">77</h3>
				<p>With his principles a man seeks either to dominate, or justify, or honour, or reproach, or conceal his habits: two men with the same principles probably seek fundamentally different ends therewith.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-78" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">78</h3>
				<p>He who despises himself, nevertheless esteems himself thereby, as a despiser.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-79" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">79</h3>
				<p>A soul which knows that it is loved, but does not itself love, betrays its sediment: its dregs come up.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-80" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">80</h3>
				<p>A thing that is explained ceases to concern us⁠—What did the God mean who gave the advice, “Know thyself!” Did it perhaps imply “Cease to be concerned about thyself! become objective!”⁠—And Socrates?⁠—And the “scientific man”?</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-81" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">81</h3>
				<p>It is terrible to die of thirst at sea. Is it necessary that you should so salt your truth that it will no longer⁠—quench thirst?</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-82" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">82</h3>
				<p>“Sympathy for all”⁠—would be harshness and tyranny for <em>thee</em>, my good neighbour.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-83" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">83</h3>
				<p><i>Instinct.</i>⁠—When the house is on fire one forgets even the dinner.⁠—Yes, but one recovers it from among the ashes.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-84" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">84</h3>
				<p>Woman learns how to hate in proportion as she⁠—forgets how to charm.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-85" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">85</h3>
				<p>The same emotions are in man and woman, but in different tempo, on that account man and woman never cease to misunderstand each other.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-86" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">86</h3>
				<p>In the background of all their personal vanity, women themselves have still their impersonal scorn⁠—for “woman.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-87" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">87</h3>
				<p><i>Fettered Heart, Free Spirit</i>.⁠—When one firmly fetters one’s heart and keeps it prisoner, one can allow one’s spirit many liberties: I said this once before. But people do not believe it when I say so, unless they know it already.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-88" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">88</h3>
				<p>One begins to distrust very clever persons when they become embarrassed.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-89" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">89</h3>
				<p>Dreadful experiences raise the question whether he who experiences them is not something dreadful also.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-90" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">90</h3>
				<p>Heavy, melancholy men turn lighter, and come temporarily to their surface, precisely by that which makes others heavy⁠—by hatred and love.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-91" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">91</h3>
				<p>So cold, so icy, that one burns one’s finger at the touch of him! Every hand that lays hold of him shrinks back!⁠—And for that very reason many think him red-hot.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-92" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">92</h3>
				<p>Who has not, at one time or another⁠—sacrificed himself for the sake of his good name?</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-93" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">93</h3>
				<p>In affability there is no hatred of men, but precisely on that account a great deal too much contempt of men.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-94" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">94</h3>
				<p>The maturity of man⁠—that means, to have reacquired the seriousness that one had as a child at play.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-95" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">95</h3>
				<p>To be ashamed of one’s immorality is a step on the ladder at the end of which one is ashamed also of one’s morality.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-96" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">96</h3>
				<p>One should part from life as Ulysses parted from Nausicaa⁠—blessing it rather than in love with it.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-97" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">97</h3>
				<p>What? A great man? I always see merely the playactor of his own ideal.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-98" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">98</h3>
				<p>When one trains one’s conscience, it kisses one while it bites.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-99" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">99</h3>
				<p><i>The Disappointed One Speaks.</i>⁠—“I listened for the echo and I heard only praise.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-100" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">100</h3>
				<p>We all feign to ourselves that we are simpler than we are, we thus relax ourselves away from our fellows.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-101" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">101</h3>
				<p>A discerning one might easily regard himself at present as the animalization of God.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-102" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">102</h3>
				<p>Discovering reciprocal love should really disenchant the lover with regard to the beloved. “What! She is modest enough to love even you? Or stupid enough? Or⁠—or⁠—”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-103" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">103</h3>
				<p><i>The Danger in Happiness.</i>⁠—“Everything now turns out best for me, I now love every fate:⁠—who would like to be my fate?”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-104" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">104</h3>
				<p>Not their love of humanity, but the impotence of their love, prevents the Christians of today⁠—burning us.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-105" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">105</h3>
				<p>The <i xml:lang="la">pia fraus</i> is still more repugnant to the taste (the “piety”) of the free spirit (the “pious man of knowledge”) than the <i xml:lang="la">impia fraus</i>. Hence the profound lack of judgment, in comparison with the Church, characteristic of the type “free spirit”⁠—as <em>its</em> non-freedom.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-106" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">106</h3>
				<p>By means of music the very passions enjoy themselves.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-107" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">107</h3>
				<p>A sign of strong character, when once the resolution has been taken, to shut the ear even to the best counterarguments. Occasionally, therefore, a will to stupidity.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-108" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">108</h3>
				<p>There is no such thing as moral phenomena, but only a moral interpretation of phenomena.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-109" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">109</h3>
				<p>The criminal is often enough not equal to his deed: he extenuates and maligns it.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-110" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">110</h3>
				<p>The advocates of a criminal are seldom artists enough to turn the beautiful terribleness of the deed to the advantage of the doer.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-111" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">111</h3>
				<p>Our vanity is most difficult to wound just when our pride has been wounded.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-112" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">112</h3>
				<p>To him who feels himself preordained to contemplation and not to belief, all believers are too noisy and obtrusive; he guards against them.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-113" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">113</h3>
				<p>“You want to prepossess him in your favour? Then you must be embarrassed before him.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-114" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">114</h3>
				<p>The immense expectation with regard to sexual love, and the coyness in this expectation, spoils all the perspectives of women at the outset.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-115" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">115</h3>
				<p>Where there is neither love nor hatred in the game, woman’s play is mediocre.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-116" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">116</h3>
				<p>The great epochs of our life are at the points when we gain courage to rebaptize our badness as the best in us.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-117" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">117</h3>
				<p>The will to overcome an emotion, is ultimately only the will of another, or of several other, emotions.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-118" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">118</h3>
				<p>There is an innocence of admiration: it is possessed by him to whom it has not yet occurred that he himself may be admired some day.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-119" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">119</h3>
				<p>Our loathing of dirt may be so great as to prevent our cleaning ourselves⁠—“justifying” ourselves.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-120" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">120</h3>
				<p>Sensuality often forces the growth of love too much, so that its root remains weak, and is easily torn up.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-121" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">121</h3>
				<p>It is a curious thing that God learned Greek when he wished to turn author⁠—and that he did not learn it better.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-122" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">122</h3>
				<p>To rejoice on account of praise is in many cases merely politeness of heart⁠—and the very opposite of vanity of spirit.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-123" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">123</h3>
				<p>Even concubinage has been corrupted⁠—by marriage.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-124" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">124</h3>
				<p>He who exults at the stake, does not triumph over pain, but because of the fact that he does not feel pain where he expected it. A parable.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-125" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">125</h3>
				<p>When we have to change an opinion about anyone, we charge heavily to his account the inconvenience he thereby causes us.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-126" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">126</h3>
				<p>A nation is a detour of nature to arrive at six or seven great men.⁠—Yes, and then to get round them.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-127" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">127</h3>
				<p>In the eyes of all true women science is hostile to the sense of shame. They feel as if one wished to peep under their skin with it⁠—or worse still! under their dress and finery.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-128" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">128</h3>
				<p>The more abstract the truth you wish to teach, the more must you allure the senses to it.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-129" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">129</h3>
				<p>The devil has the most extensive perspectives for God; on that account he keeps so far away from him:⁠—the devil, in effect, as the oldest friend of knowledge.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-130" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">130</h3>
				<p>What a person <em>is</em> begins to betray itself when his talent decreases⁠—when he ceases to show what he <em>can</em> do. Talent is also an adornment; an adornment is also a concealment.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-131" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">131</h3>
				<p>The sexes deceive themselves about each other: the reason is that in reality they honour and love only themselves (or their own ideal, to express it more agreeably). Thus man wishes woman to be peaceable: but in fact woman is <em>essentially</em> unpeaceable, like the cat, however well she may have assumed the peaceable demeanour.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-132" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">132</h3>
				<p>One is punished best for one’s virtues.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-133" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">133</h3>
				<p>He who cannot find the way to <em>his</em> ideal, lives more frivolously and shamelessly than the man without an ideal.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-134" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">134</h3>
				<p>From the senses originate all trustworthiness, all good conscience, all evidence of truth.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-135" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">135</h3>
				<p>Pharisaism is not a deterioration of the good man; a considerable part of it is rather an essential condition of being good.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-136" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">136</h3>
				<p>The one seeks an accoucheur for his thoughts, the other seeks someone whom he can assist: a good conversation thus originates.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-137" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">137</h3>
				<p>In intercourse with scholars and artists one readily makes mistakes of opposite kinds: in a remarkable scholar one not infrequently finds a mediocre man; and often, even in a mediocre artist, one finds a very remarkable man.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-138" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">138</h3>
				<p>We do the same when awake as when dreaming: we only invent and imagine him with whom we have intercourse⁠—and forget it immediately.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-139" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">139</h3>
				<p>In revenge and in love woman is more barbarous than man.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-140" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">140</h3>
				<p><i>Advice As a Riddle.</i>⁠—“If the band is not to break, bite it first⁠—secure to make!”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-141" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">141</h3>
				<p>The belly is the reason why man does not so readily take himself for a God.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-142" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">142</h3>
				<p>The chastest utterance I ever heard: “<i xml:lang="fr">Dans le véritable amour c’est l’âme qui enveloppe le corps.</i>”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-143" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">143</h3>
				<p>Our vanity would like what we do best to pass precisely for what is most difficult to us.⁠—Concerning the origin of many systems of morals.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-144" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">144</h3>
				<p>When a woman has scholarly inclinations there is generally something wrong with her sexual nature. Barrenness itself conduces to a certain virility of taste; man, indeed, if I may say so, is “the barren animal.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-145" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">145</h3>
				<p>Comparing man and woman generally, one may say that woman would not have the genius for adornment, if she had not the instinct for the <em>secondary</em> role.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-146" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">146</h3>
				<p>He who fights with monsters should be careful lest he thereby become a monster. And if thou gaze long into an abyss, the abyss will also gaze into thee.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-147" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">147</h3>
				<p>From old Florentine novels⁠—moreover, from life: <i xml:lang="it">Buona femmina e mala femmina vuol bastone.</i> <cite>—⁠Sacchetti, <abbr>Nov.</abbr> ’86.</cite></p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-148" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">148</h3>
				<p>To seduce their neighbour to a favourable opinion, and afterwards to believe implicitly in this opinion of their neighbour⁠—who can do this conjuring trick so well as women?</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-149" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">149</h3>
				<p>That which an age considers evil is usually an unseasonable echo of what was formerly considered good⁠—the atavism of an old ideal.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-150" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">150</h3>
				<p>Around the hero everything becomes a tragedy; around the demigod everything becomes a satyr-play; and around God everything becomes⁠—what? perhaps a “world”?</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-151" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">151</h3>
				<p>It is not enough to possess a talent: one must also have your permission to possess it;⁠—eh, my friends?</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-152" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">152</h3>
				<p>“Where there is the tree of knowledge, there is always Paradise”: so say the most ancient and the most modern serpents.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-153" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">153</h3>
				<p>What is done out of love always takes place beyond good and evil.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-154" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">154</h3>
				<p>Objection, evasion, joyous distrust, and love of irony are signs of health; everything absolute belongs to pathology.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-155" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">155</h3>
				<p>The sense of the tragic increases and declines with sensuousness.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-156" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">156</h3>
				<p>Insanity in individuals is something rare⁠—but in groups, parties, nations, and epochs it is the rule.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-157" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">157</h3>
				<p>The thought of suicide is a great consolation: by means of it one gets successfully through many a bad night.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-158" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">158</h3>
				<p>Not only our reason, but also our conscience, truckles to our strongest impulse⁠—the tyrant in us.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-159" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">159</h3>
				<p>One <em>must</em> repay good and ill; but why just to the person who did us good or ill?</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-160" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">160</h3>
				<p>One no longer loves one’s knowledge sufficiently after one has communicated it.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-161" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">161</h3>
				<p>Poets act shamelessly towards their experiences: they exploit them.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-162" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">162</h3>
				<p>“Our fellow-creature is not our neighbour, but our neighbour’s neighbour”:⁠—so thinks every nation.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-163" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">163</h3>
				<p>Love brings to light the noble and hidden qualities of a lover⁠—his rare and exceptional traits: it is thus liable to be deceptive as to his normal character.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-164" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">164</h3>
				<p>Jesus said to his Jews: “The law was for servants;⁠—love God as I love him, as his Son! What have we Sons of God to do with morals!”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-165" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">165</h3>
				<p><i>In Sight of Every Party.</i>⁠—A shepherd has always need of a bellwether⁠—or he has himself to be a wether occasionally.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-166" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">166</h3>
				<p>One may indeed lie with the mouth; but with the accompanying grimace one nevertheless tells the truth.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-167" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">167</h3>
				<p>To vigorous men intimacy is a matter of shame⁠—and something precious.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-168" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">168</h3>
				<p>Christianity gave Eros poison to drink; he did not die of it, certainly, but degenerated to Vice.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-169" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">169</h3>
				<p>To talk much about oneself may also be a means of concealing oneself.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-170" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">170</h3>
				<p>In praise there is more obtrusiveness than in blame.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-171" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">171</h3>
				<p>Pity has an almost ludicrous effect on a man of knowledge, like tender hands on a Cyclops.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-172" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">172</h3>
				<p>One occasionally embraces some one or other, out of love to mankind (because one cannot embrace all); but this is what one must never confess to the individual.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-173" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">173</h3>
				<p>One does not hate as long as one disesteems, but only when one esteems equal or superior.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-174" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">174</h3>
				<p>Ye Utilitarians⁠—ye, too, love the <em>utile</em> only as a <em>vehicle</em> for your inclinations⁠—ye, too, really find the noise of its wheels insupportable!</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-175" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">175</h3>
				<p>One loves ultimately one’s desires, not the thing desired.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-176" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">176</h3>
				<p>The vanity of others is only counter to our taste when it is counter to our vanity.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-177" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">177</h3>
				<p>With regard to what “truthfulness” is, perhaps nobody has ever been sufficiently truthful.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-178" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">178</h3>
				<p>One does not believe in the follies of clever men: what a forfeiture of the rights of man!</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-179" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">179</h3>
				<p>The consequences of our actions seize us by the forelock, very indifferent to the fact that we have meanwhile “reformed.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-180" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">180</h3>
				<p>There is an innocence in lying which is the sign of good faith in a cause.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-181" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">181</h3>
				<p>It is inhuman to bless when one is being cursed.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-182" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">182</h3>
				<p>The familiarity of superiors embitters one, because it may not be returned.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-183" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">183</h3>
				<p>“I am affected, not because you have deceived me, but because I can no longer believe in you.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-184" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">184</h3>
				<p>There is a haughtiness of kindness which has the appearance of wickedness.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-185" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">185</h3>
				<p>“I dislike him.”⁠—Why?⁠—“I am not a match for him.”⁠—Did anyone ever answer so?</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
