<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Part 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">We Scholars</span>
			</h2>
			
    <p>
      204. At the risk that moralizing may also reveal itself here as that which
      it has always been&mdash;namely, resolutely MONTRER SES PLAIES, according
      to Balzac&mdash;I would venture to protest against an improper and
      injurious alteration of rank, which quite unnoticed, and as if with the
      best conscience, threatens nowadays to establish itself in the relations
      of science and philosophy. I mean to say that one must have the right out
      of one's own EXPERIENCE&mdash;experience, as it seems to me, always
      implies unfortunate experience?&mdash;to treat of such an important
      question of rank, so as not to speak of colour like the blind, or AGAINST
      science like women and artists ("Ah! this dreadful science!" sigh their
      instinct and their shame, "it always FINDS THINGS OUT!"). The declaration
      of independence of the scientific man, his emancipation from philosophy,
      is one of the subtler after-effects of democratic organization and
      disorganization: the self-glorification and self-conceitedness of the
      learned man is now everywhere in full bloom, and in its best springtime&mdash;which
      does not mean to imply that in this case self-praise smells sweet. Here
      also the instinct of the populace cries, "Freedom from all masters!" and
      after science has, with the happiest results, resisted theology, whose
      "hand-maid" it had been too long, it now proposes in its wantonness and
      indiscretion to lay down laws for philosophy, and in its turn to play the
      "master"&mdash;what am I saying! to play the PHILOSOPHER on its own
      account. My memory&mdash;the memory of a scientific man, if you please!&mdash;teems
      with the naivetes of insolence which I have heard about philosophy and
      philosophers from young naturalists and old physicians (not to mention the
      most cultured and most conceited of all learned men, the philologists and
      schoolmasters, who are both the one and the other by profession). On one
      occasion it was the specialist and the Jack Horner who instinctively stood
      on the defensive against all synthetic tasks and capabilities; at another
      time it was the industrious worker who had got a scent of OTIUM and
      refined luxuriousness in the internal economy of the philosopher, and felt
      himself aggrieved and belittled thereby. On another occasion it was the
      colour-blindness of the utilitarian, who sees nothing in philosophy but a
      series of REFUTED systems, and an extravagant expenditure which "does
      nobody any good". At another time the fear of disguised mysticism and of
      the boundary-adjustment of knowledge became conspicuous, at another time
      the disregard of individual philosophers, which had involuntarily extended
      to disregard of philosophy generally. In fine, I found most frequently,
      behind the proud disdain of philosophy in young scholars, the evil
      after-effect of some particular philosopher, to whom on the whole
      obedience had been foresworn, without, however, the spell of his scornful
      estimates of other philosophers having been got rid of&mdash;the result
      being a general ill-will to all philosophy. (Such seems to me, for
      instance, the after-effect of Schopenhauer on the most modern Germany: by
      his unintelligent rage against Hegel, he has succeeded in severing the
      whole of the last generation of Germans from its connection with German
      culture, which culture, all things considered, has been an elevation and a
      divining refinement of the HISTORICAL SENSE, but precisely at this point
      Schopenhauer himself was poor, irreceptive, and un-German to the extent of
      ingeniousness.) On the whole, speaking generally, it may just have been
      the humanness, all-too-humanness of the modern philosophers themselves, in
      short, their contemptibleness, which has injured most radically the
      reverence for philosophy and opened the doors to the instinct of the
      populace. Let it but be acknowledged to what an extent our modern world
      diverges from the whole style of the world of Heraclitus, Plato,
      Empedocles, and whatever else all the royal and magnificent anchorites of
      the spirit were called, and with what justice an honest man of science MAY
      feel himself of a better family and origin, in view of such
      representatives of philosophy, who, owing to the fashion of the present
      day, are just as much aloft as they are down below&mdash;in Germany, for
      instance, the two lions of Berlin, the anarchist Eugen Duhring and the
      amalgamist Eduard von Hartmann. It is especially the sight of those
      hotch-potch philosophers, who call themselves "realists," or
      "positivists," which is calculated to implant a dangerous distrust in the
      soul of a young and ambitious scholar those philosophers, at the best, are
      themselves but scholars and specialists, that is very evident! All of them
      are persons who have been vanquished and BROUGHT BACK AGAIN under the
      dominion of science, who at one time or another claimed more from
      themselves, without having a right to the "more" and its responsibility&mdash;and
      who now, creditably, rancorously, and vindictively, represent in word and
      deed, DISBELIEF in the master-task and supremacy of philosophy After all,
      how could it be otherwise? Science flourishes nowadays and has the good
      conscience clearly visible on its countenance, while that to which the
      entire modern philosophy has gradually sunk, the remnant of philosophy of
      the present day, excites distrust and displeasure, if not scorn and pity
      Philosophy reduced to a "theory of knowledge," no more in fact than a
      diffident science of epochs and doctrine of forbearance a philosophy that
      never even gets beyond the threshold, and rigorously DENIES itself the
      right to enter&mdash;that is philosophy in its last throes, an end, an
      agony, something that awakens pity. How could such a philosophy&mdash;RULE!
    </p>
    <p>
      205. The dangers that beset the evolution of the philosopher are, in fact,
      so manifold nowadays, that one might doubt whether this fruit could still
      come to maturity. The extent and towering structure of the sciences have
      increased enormously, and therewith also the probability that the
      philosopher will grow tired even as a learner, or will attach himself
      somewhere and "specialize" so that he will no longer attain to his
      elevation, that is to say, to his superspection, his circumspection, and
      his DESPECTION. Or he gets aloft too late, when the best of his maturity
      and strength is past, or when he is impaired, coarsened, and deteriorated,
      so that his view, his general estimate of things, is no longer of much
      importance. It is perhaps just the refinement of his intellectual
      conscience that makes him hesitate and linger on the way, he dreads the
      temptation to become a dilettante, a millepede, a milleantenna, he knows
      too well that as a discerner, one who has lost his self-respect no longer
      commands, no longer LEADS, unless he should aspire to become a great
      play-actor, a philosophical Cagliostro and spiritual rat-catcher&mdash;in
      short, a misleader. This is in the last instance a question of taste, if
      it has not really been a question of conscience. To double once more the
      philosopher's difficulties, there is also the fact that he demands from
      himself a verdict, a Yea or Nay, not concerning science, but concerning
      life and the worth of life&mdash;he learns unwillingly to believe that it
      is his right and even his duty to obtain this verdict, and he has to seek
      his way to the right and the belief only through the most extensive
      (perhaps disturbing and destroying) experiences, often hesitating,
      doubting, and dumbfounded. In fact, the philosopher has long been mistaken
      and confused by the multitude, either with the scientific man and ideal
      scholar, or with the religiously elevated, desensualized, desecularized
      visionary and God-intoxicated man; and even yet when one hears anybody
      praised, because he lives "wisely," or "as a philosopher," it hardly means
      anything more than "prudently and apart." Wisdom: that seems to the
      populace to be a kind of flight, a means and artifice for withdrawing
      successfully from a bad game; but the GENUINE philosopher&mdash;does it
      not seem so to US, my friends?&mdash;lives "unphilosophically" and
      "unwisely," above all, IMPRUDENTLY, and feels the obligation and burden of
      a hundred attempts and temptations of life&mdash;he risks HIMSELF
      constantly, he plays THIS bad game.
    </p>
    <p>
      206. In relation to the genius, that is to say, a being who either
      ENGENDERS or PRODUCES&mdash;both words understood in their fullest sense&mdash;the
      man of learning, the scientific average man, has always something of the
      old maid about him; for, like her, he is not conversant with the two
      principal functions of man. To both, of course, to the scholar and to the
      old maid, one concedes respectability, as if by way of indemnification&mdash;in
      these cases one emphasizes the respectability&mdash;and yet, in the
      compulsion of this concession, one has the same admixture of vexation. Let
      us examine more closely: what is the scientific man? Firstly, a
      commonplace type of man, with commonplace virtues: that is to say, a
      non-ruling, non-authoritative, and non-self-sufficient type of man; he
      possesses industry, patient adaptableness to rank and file, equability and
      moderation in capacity and requirement; he has the instinct for people
      like himself, and for that which they require&mdash;for instance: the
      portion of independence and green meadow without which there is no rest
      from labour, the claim to honour and consideration (which first and
      foremost presupposes recognition and recognisability), the sunshine of a
      good name, the perpetual ratification of his value and usefulness, with
      which the inward DISTRUST which lies at the bottom of the heart of all
      dependent men and gregarious animals, has again and again to be overcome.
      The learned man, as is appropriate, has also maladies and faults of an
      ignoble kind: he is full of petty envy, and has a lynx-eye for the weak
      points in those natures to whose elevations he cannot attain. He is
      confiding, yet only as one who lets himself go, but does not FLOW; and
      precisely before the man of the great current he stands all the colder and
      more reserved&mdash;his eye is then like a smooth and irresponsive lake,
      which is no longer moved by rapture or sympathy. The worst and most
      dangerous thing of which a scholar is capable results from the instinct of
      mediocrity of his type, from the Jesuitism of mediocrity, which labours
      instinctively for the destruction of the exceptional man, and endeavours
      to break&mdash;or still better, to relax&mdash;every bent bow To relax, of
      course, with consideration, and naturally with an indulgent hand&mdash;to
      RELAX with confiding sympathy that is the real art of Jesuitism, which has
      always understood how to introduce itself as the religion of sympathy.
    </p>
    <p>
      207. However gratefully one may welcome the OBJECTIVE spirit&mdash;and who
      has not been sick to death of all subjectivity and its confounded
      IPSISIMOSITY!&mdash;in the end, however, one must learn caution even with
      regard to one's gratitude, and put a stop to the exaggeration with which
      the unselfing and depersonalizing of the spirit has recently been
      celebrated, as if it were the goal in itself, as if it were salvation and
      glorification&mdash;as is especially accustomed to happen in the pessimist
      school, which has also in its turn good reasons for paying the highest
      honours to "disinterested knowledge" The objective man, who no longer
      curses and scolds like the pessimist, the IDEAL man of learning in whom
      the scientific instinct blossoms forth fully after a thousand complete and
      partial failures, is assuredly one of the most costly instruments that
      exist, but his place is in the hand of one who is more powerful He is only
      an instrument, we may say, he is a MIRROR&mdash;he is no "purpose in
      himself" The objective man is in truth a mirror accustomed to prostration
      before everything that wants to be known, with such desires only as
      knowing or "reflecting" implies&mdash;he waits until something comes, and
      then expands himself sensitively, so that even the light footsteps and
      gliding-past of spiritual beings may not be lost on his surface and film
      Whatever "personality" he still possesses seems to him accidental,
      arbitrary, or still oftener, disturbing, so much has he come to regard
      himself as the passage and reflection of outside forms and events He calls
      up the recollection of "himself" with an effort, and not infrequently
      wrongly, he readily confounds himself with other persons, he makes
      mistakes with regard to his own needs, and here only is he unrefined and
      negligent Perhaps he is troubled about the health, or the pettiness and
      confined atmosphere of wife and friend, or the lack of companions and
      society&mdash;indeed, he sets himself to reflect on his suffering, but in
      vain! His thoughts already rove away to the MORE GENERAL case, and
      tomorrow he knows as little as he knew yesterday how to help himself He
      does not now take himself seriously and devote time to himself he is
      serene, NOT from lack of trouble, but from lack of capacity for grasping
      and dealing with HIS trouble The habitual complaisance with respect to all
      objects and experiences, the radiant and impartial hospitality with which
      he receives everything that comes his way, his habit of inconsiderate
      good-nature, of dangerous indifference as to Yea and Nay: alas! there are
      enough of cases in which he has to atone for these virtues of his!&mdash;and
      as man generally, he becomes far too easily the CAPUT MORTUUM of such
      virtues. Should one wish love or hatred from him&mdash;I mean love and
      hatred as God, woman, and animal understand them&mdash;he will do what he
      can, and furnish what he can. But one must not be surprised if it should
      not be much&mdash;if he should show himself just at this point to be
      false, fragile, questionable, and deteriorated. His love is constrained,
      his hatred is artificial, and rather UN TOUR DE FORCE, a slight
      ostentation and exaggeration. He is only genuine so far as he can be
      objective; only in his serene totality is he still "nature" and "natural."
      His mirroring and eternally self-polishing soul no longer knows how to
      affirm, no longer how to deny; he does not command; neither does he
      destroy. "JE NE MEPRISE PRESQUE RIEN"&mdash;he says, with Leibniz: let us
      not overlook nor undervalue the PRESQUE! Neither is he a model man; he
      does not go in advance of any one, nor after, either; he places himself
      generally too far off to have any reason for espousing the cause of either
      good or evil. If he has been so long confounded with the PHILOSOPHER, with
      the Caesarian trainer and dictator of civilization, he has had far too
      much honour, and what is more essential in him has been overlooked&mdash;he
      is an instrument, something of a slave, though certainly the sublimest
      sort of slave, but nothing in himself&mdash;PRESQUE RIEN! The objective
      man is an instrument, a costly, easily injured, easily tarnished measuring
      instrument and mirroring apparatus, which is to be taken care of and
      respected; but he is no goal, not outgoing nor upgoing, no complementary
      man in whom the REST of existence justifies itself, no termination&mdash;and
      still less a commencement, an engendering, or primary cause, nothing
      hardy, powerful, self-centred, that wants to be master; but rather only a
      soft, inflated, delicate, movable potter's-form, that must wait for some
      kind of content and frame to "shape" itself thereto&mdash;for the most
      part a man without frame and content, a "selfless" man. Consequently,
      also, nothing for women, IN PARENTHESI.
    </p>
    <p>
      208. When a philosopher nowadays makes known that he is not a skeptic&mdash;I
      hope that has been gathered from the foregoing description of the
      objective spirit?&mdash;people all hear it impatiently; they regard him on
      that account with some apprehension, they would like to ask so many, many
      questions... indeed among timid hearers, of whom there are now so many, he
      is henceforth said to be dangerous. With his repudiation of skepticism, it
      seems to them as if they heard some evil-threatening sound in the
      distance, as if a new kind of explosive were being tried somewhere, a
      dynamite of the spirit, perhaps a newly discovered Russian NIHILINE, a
      pessimism BONAE VOLUNTATIS, that not only denies, means denial, but&mdash;dreadful
      thought! PRACTISES denial. Against this kind of "good-will"&mdash;a will
      to the veritable, actual negation of life&mdash;there is, as is generally
      acknowledged nowadays, no better soporific and sedative than skepticism,
      the mild, pleasing, lulling poppy of skepticism; and Hamlet himself is now
      prescribed by the doctors of the day as an antidote to the "spirit," and
      its underground noises. "Are not our ears already full of bad sounds?" say
      the skeptics, as lovers of repose, and almost as a kind of safety police;
      "this subterranean Nay is terrible! Be still, ye pessimistic moles!" The
      skeptic, in effect, that delicate creature, is far too easily frightened;
      his conscience is schooled so as to start at every Nay, and even at that
      sharp, decided Yea, and feels something like a bite thereby. Yea! and Nay!&mdash;they
      seem to him opposed to morality; he loves, on the contrary, to make a
      festival to his virtue by a noble aloofness, while perhaps he says with
      Montaigne: "What do I know?" Or with Socrates: "I know that I know
      nothing." Or: "Here I do not trust myself, no door is open to me." Or:
      "Even if the door were open, why should I enter immediately?" Or: "What is
      the use of any hasty hypotheses? It might quite well be in good taste to
      make no hypotheses at all. Are you absolutely obliged to straighten at
      once what is crooked? to stuff every hole with some kind of oakum? Is
      there not time enough for that? Has not the time leisure? Oh, ye demons,
      can ye not at all WAIT? The uncertain also has its charms, the Sphinx,
      too, is a Circe, and Circe, too, was a philosopher."&mdash;Thus does a
      skeptic console himself; and in truth he needs some consolation. For
      skepticism is the most spiritual expression of a certain many-sided
      physiological temperament, which in ordinary language is called nervous
      debility and sickliness; it arises whenever races or classes which have
      been long separated, decisively and suddenly blend with one another. In
      the new generation, which has inherited as it were different standards and
      valuations in its blood, everything is disquiet, derangement, doubt, and
      tentativeness; the best powers operate restrictively, the very virtues
      prevent each other growing and becoming strong, equilibrium, ballast, and
      perpendicular stability are lacking in body and soul. That, however, which
      is most diseased and degenerated in such nondescripts is the WILL; they
      are no longer familiar with independence of decision, or the courageous
      feeling of pleasure in willing&mdash;they are doubtful of the "freedom of
      the will" even in their dreams Our present-day Europe, the scene of a
      senseless, precipitate attempt at a radical blending of classes, and
      CONSEQUENTLY of races, is therefore skeptical in all its heights and
      depths, sometimes exhibiting the mobile skepticism which springs
      impatiently and wantonly from branch to branch, sometimes with gloomy
      aspect, like a cloud over-charged with interrogative signs&mdash;and often
      sick unto death of its will! Paralysis of will, where do we not find this
      cripple sitting nowadays! And yet how bedecked oftentimes' How seductively
      ornamented! There are the finest gala dresses and disguises for this
      disease, and that, for instance, most of what places itself nowadays in
      the show-cases as "objectiveness," "the scientific spirit," "L'ART POUR
      L'ART," and "pure voluntary knowledge," is only decked-out skepticism and
      paralysis of will&mdash;I am ready to answer for this diagnosis of the
      European disease&mdash;The disease of the will is diffused unequally over
      Europe, it is worst and most varied where civilization has longest
      prevailed, it decreases according as "the barbarian" still&mdash;or again&mdash;asserts
      his claims under the loose drapery of Western culture It is therefore in
      the France of today, as can be readily disclosed and comprehended, that
      the will is most infirm, and France, which has always had a masterly
      aptitude for converting even the portentous crises of its spirit into
      something charming and seductive, now manifests emphatically its
      intellectual ascendancy over Europe, by being the school and exhibition of
      all the charms of skepticism The power to will and to persist, moreover,
      in a resolution, is already somewhat stronger in Germany, and again in the
      North of Germany it is stronger than in Central Germany, it is
      considerably stronger in England, Spain, and Corsica, associated with
      phlegm in the former and with hard skulls in the latter&mdash;not to
      mention Italy, which is too young yet to know what it wants, and must
      first show whether it can exercise will, but it is strongest and most
      surprising of all in that immense middle empire where Europe as it were
      flows back to Asia&mdash;namely, in Russia There the power to will has
      been long stored up and accumulated, there the will&mdash;uncertain
      whether to be negative or affirmative&mdash;waits threateningly to be
      discharged (to borrow their pet phrase from our physicists) Perhaps not
      only Indian wars and complications in Asia would be necessary to free
      Europe from its greatest danger, but also internal subversion, the
      shattering of the empire into small states, and above all the introduction
      of parliamentary imbecility, together with the obligation of every one to
      read his newspaper at breakfast I do not say this as one who desires it,
      in my heart I should rather prefer the contrary&mdash;I mean such an
      increase in the threatening attitude of Russia, that Europe would have to
      make up its mind to become equally threatening&mdash;namely, TO ACQUIRE
      ONE WILL, by means of a new caste to rule over the Continent, a
      persistent, dreadful will of its own, that can set its aims thousands of
      years ahead; so that the long spun-out comedy of its petty-statism, and
      its dynastic as well as its democratic many-willed-ness, might finally be
      brought to a close. The time for petty politics is past; the next century
      will bring the struggle for the dominion of the world&mdash;the COMPULSION
      to great politics.
    </p>
    <p>
      209. As to how far the new warlike age on which we Europeans have
      evidently entered may perhaps favour the growth of another and stronger
      kind of skepticism, I should like to express myself preliminarily merely
      by a parable, which the lovers of German history will already understand.
      That unscrupulous enthusiast for big, handsome grenadiers (who, as King of
      Prussia, brought into being a military and skeptical genius&mdash;and
      therewith, in reality, the new and now triumphantly emerged type of
      German), the problematic, crazy father of Frederick the Great, had on one
      point the very knack and lucky grasp of the genius: he knew what was then
      lacking in Germany, the want of which was a hundred times more alarming
      and serious than any lack of culture and social form&mdash;his ill-will to
      the young Frederick resulted from the anxiety of a profound instinct. MEN
      WERE LACKING; and he suspected, to his bitterest regret, that his own son
      was not man enough. There, however, he deceived himself; but who would not
      have deceived himself in his place? He saw his son lapsed to atheism, to
      the ESPRIT, to the pleasant frivolity of clever Frenchmen&mdash;he saw in
      the background the great bloodsucker, the spider skepticism; he suspected
      the incurable wretchedness of a heart no longer hard enough either for
      evil or good, and of a broken will that no longer commands, is no longer
      ABLE to command. Meanwhile, however, there grew up in his son that new
      kind of harder and more dangerous skepticism&mdash;who knows TO WHAT
      EXTENT it was encouraged just by his father's hatred and the icy
      melancholy of a will condemned to solitude?&mdash;the skepticism of daring
      manliness, which is closely related to the genius for war and conquest,
      and made its first entrance into Germany in the person of the great
      Frederick. This skepticism despises and nevertheless grasps; it undermines
      and takes possession; it does not believe, but it does not thereby lose
      itself; it gives the spirit a dangerous liberty, but it keeps strict guard
      over the heart. It is the GERMAN form of skepticism, which, as a continued
      Fredericianism, risen to the highest spirituality, has kept Europe for a
      considerable time under the dominion of the German spirit and its critical
      and historical distrust Owing to the insuperably strong and tough
      masculine character of the great German philologists and historical
      critics (who, rightly estimated, were also all of them artists of
      destruction and dissolution), a NEW conception of the German spirit
      gradually established itself&mdash;in spite of all Romanticism in music
      and philosophy&mdash;in which the leaning towards masculine skepticism was
      decidedly prominent whether, for instance, as fearlessness of gaze, as
      courage and sternness of the dissecting hand, or as resolute will to
      dangerous voyages of discovery, to spiritualized North Pole expeditions
      under barren and dangerous skies. There may be good grounds for it when
      warm-blooded and superficial humanitarians cross themselves before this
      spirit, CET ESPRIT FATALISTE, IRONIQUE, MEPHISTOPHELIQUE, as Michelet
      calls it, not without a shudder. But if one would realize how
      characteristic is this fear of the "man" in the German spirit which
      awakened Europe out of its "dogmatic slumber," let us call to mind the
      former conception which had to be overcome by this new one&mdash;and that
      it is not so very long ago that a masculinized woman could dare, with
      unbridled presumption, to recommend the Germans to the interest of Europe
      as gentle, good-hearted, weak-willed, and poetical fools. Finally, let us
      only understand profoundly enough Napoleon's astonishment when he saw
      Goethe it reveals what had been regarded for centuries as the "German
      spirit" "VOILA UN HOMME!"&mdash;that was as much as to say "But this is a
      MAN! And I only expected to see a German!"
    </p>
    <p>
      210. Supposing, then, that in the picture of the philosophers of the
      future, some trait suggests the question whether they must not perhaps be
      skeptics in the last-mentioned sense, something in them would only be
      designated thereby&mdash;and not they themselves. With equal right they
      might call themselves critics, and assuredly they will be men of
      experiments. By the name with which I ventured to baptize them, I have
      already expressly emphasized their attempting and their love of attempting
      is this because, as critics in body and soul, they will love to make use
      of experiments in a new, and perhaps wider and more dangerous sense? In
      their passion for knowledge, will they have to go further in daring and
      painful attempts than the sensitive and pampered taste of a democratic
      century can approve of?&mdash;There is no doubt these coming ones will be
      least able to dispense with the serious and not unscrupulous qualities
      which distinguish the critic from the skeptic I mean the certainty as to
      standards of worth, the conscious employment of a unity of method, the
      wary courage, the standing-alone, and the capacity for
      self-responsibility, indeed, they will avow among themselves a DELIGHT in
      denial and dissection, and a certain considerate cruelty, which knows how
      to handle the knife surely and deftly, even when the heart bleeds They
      will be STERNER (and perhaps not always towards themselves only) than
      humane people may desire, they will not deal with the "truth" in order
      that it may "please" them, or "elevate" and "inspire" them&mdash;they will
      rather have little faith in "TRUTH" bringing with it such revels for the
      feelings. They will smile, those rigorous spirits, when any one says in
      their presence "That thought elevates me, why should it not be true?" or
      "That work enchants me, why should it not be beautiful?" or "That artist
      enlarges me, why should he not be great?" Perhaps they will not only have
      a smile, but a genuine disgust for all that is thus rapturous, idealistic,
      feminine, and hermaphroditic, and if any one could look into their inmost
      hearts, he would not easily find therein the intention to reconcile
      "Christian sentiments" with "antique taste," or even with "modern
      parliamentarism" (the kind of reconciliation necessarily found even among
      philosophers in our very uncertain and consequently very conciliatory
      century). Critical discipline, and every habit that conduces to purity and
      rigour in intellectual matters, will not only be demanded from themselves
      by these philosophers of the future, they may even make a display thereof
      as their special adornment&mdash;nevertheless they will not want to be
      called critics on that account. It will seem to them no small indignity to
      philosophy to have it decreed, as is so welcome nowadays, that "philosophy
      itself is criticism and critical science&mdash;and nothing else whatever!"
      Though this estimate of philosophy may enjoy the approval of all the
      Positivists of France and Germany (and possibly it even flattered the
      heart and taste of KANT: let us call to mind the titles of his principal
      works), our new philosophers will say, notwithstanding, that critics are
      instruments of the philosopher, and just on that account, as instruments,
      they are far from being philosophers themselves! Even the great Chinaman
      of Konigsberg was only a great critic.
    </p>
    <p>
      211. I insist upon it that people finally cease confounding philosophical
      workers, and in general scientific men, with philosophers&mdash;that
      precisely here one should strictly give "each his own," and not give those
      far too much, these far too little. It may be necessary for the education
      of the real philosopher that he himself should have once stood upon all
      those steps upon which his servants, the scientific workers of philosophy,
      remain standing, and MUST remain standing he himself must perhaps have
      been critic, and dogmatist, and historian, and besides, poet, and
      collector, and traveler, and riddle-reader, and moralist, and seer, and
      "free spirit," and almost everything, in order to traverse the whole range
      of human values and estimations, and that he may BE ABLE with a variety of
      eyes and consciences to look from a height to any distance, from a depth
      up to any height, from a nook into any expanse. But all these are only
      preliminary conditions for his task; this task itself demands something
      else&mdash;it requires him TO CREATE VALUES. The philosophical workers,
      after the excellent pattern of Kant and Hegel, have to fix and formalize
      some great existing body of valuations&mdash;that is to say, former
      DETERMINATIONS OF VALUE, creations of value, which have become prevalent,
      and are for a time called "truths"&mdash;whether in the domain of the
      LOGICAL, the POLITICAL (moral), or the ARTISTIC. It is for these
      investigators to make whatever has happened and been esteemed hitherto,
      conspicuous, conceivable, intelligible, and manageable, to shorten
      everything long, even "time" itself, and to SUBJUGATE the entire past: an
      immense and wonderful task, in the carrying out of which all refined
      pride, all tenacious will, can surely find satisfaction. THE REAL
      PHILOSOPHERS, HOWEVER, ARE COMMANDERS AND LAW-GIVERS; they say: "Thus
      SHALL it be!" They determine first the Whither and the Why of mankind, and
      thereby set aside the previous labour of all philosophical workers, and
      all subjugators of the past&mdash;they grasp at the future with a creative
      hand, and whatever is and was, becomes for them thereby a means, an
      instrument, and a hammer. Their "knowing" is CREATING, their creating is a
      law-giving, their will to truth is&mdash;WILL TO POWER.&mdash;Are there at
      present such philosophers? Have there ever been such philosophers? MUST
      there not be such philosophers some day? ...
    </p>
    <p>
      212. It is always more obvious to me that the philosopher, as a man
      INDISPENSABLE for the morrow and the day after the morrow, has ever found
      himself, and HAS BEEN OBLIGED to find himself, in contradiction to the day
      in which he lives; his enemy has always been the ideal of his day.
      Hitherto all those extraordinary furtherers of humanity whom one calls
      philosophers&mdash;who rarely regarded themselves as lovers of wisdom, but
      rather as disagreeable fools and dangerous interrogators&mdash;have found
      their mission, their hard, involuntary, imperative mission (in the end,
      however, the greatness of their mission), in being the bad conscience of
      their age. In putting the vivisector's knife to the breast of the very
      VIRTUES OF THEIR AGE, they have betrayed their own secret; it has been for
      the sake of a NEW greatness of man, a new untrodden path to his
      aggrandizement. They have always disclosed how much hypocrisy, indolence,
      self-indulgence, and self-neglect, how much falsehood was concealed under
      the most venerated types of contemporary morality, how much virtue was
      OUTLIVED, they have always said "We must remove hence to where YOU are
      least at home" In the face of a world of "modern ideas," which would like
      to confine every one in a corner, in a "specialty," a philosopher, if
      there could be philosophers nowadays, would be compelled to place the
      greatness of man, the conception of "greatness," precisely in his
      comprehensiveness and multifariousness, in his all-roundness, he would
      even determine worth and rank according to the amount and variety of that
      which a man could bear and take upon himself, according to the EXTENT to
      which a man could stretch his responsibility Nowadays the taste and virtue
      of the age weaken and attenuate the will, nothing is so adapted to the
      spirit of the age as weakness of will consequently, in the ideal of the
      philosopher, strength of will, sternness, and capacity for prolonged
      resolution, must specially be included in the conception of "greatness",
      with as good a right as the opposite doctrine, with its ideal of a silly,
      renouncing, humble, selfless humanity, was suited to an opposite age&mdash;such
      as the sixteenth century, which suffered from its accumulated energy of
      will, and from the wildest torrents and floods of selfishness In the time
      of Socrates, among men only of worn-out instincts, old conservative
      Athenians who let themselves go&mdash;"for the sake of happiness," as they
      said, for the sake of pleasure, as their conduct indicated&mdash;and who
      had continually on their lips the old pompous words to which they had long
      forfeited the right by the life they led, IRONY was perhaps necessary for
      greatness of soul, the wicked Socratic assurance of the old physician and
      plebeian, who cut ruthlessly into his own flesh, as into the flesh and
      heart of the "noble," with a look that said plainly enough "Do not
      dissemble before me! here&mdash;we are equal!" At present, on the
      contrary, when throughout Europe the herding-animal alone attains to
      honours, and dispenses honours, when "equality of right" can too readily
      be transformed into equality in wrong&mdash;I mean to say into general war
      against everything rare, strange, and privileged, against the higher man,
      the higher soul, the higher duty, the higher responsibility, the creative
      plenipotence and lordliness&mdash;at present it belongs to the conception
      of "greatness" to be noble, to wish to be apart, to be capable of being
      different, to stand alone, to have to live by personal initiative, and the
      philosopher will betray something of his own ideal when he asserts "He
      shall be the greatest who can be the most solitary, the most concealed,
      the most divergent, the man beyond good and evil, the master of his
      virtues, and of super-abundance of will; precisely this shall be called
      GREATNESS: as diversified as can be entire, as ample as can be full." And
      to ask once more the question: Is greatness POSSIBLE&mdash;nowadays?
    </p>
    <p>
      213. It is difficult to learn what a philosopher is, because it cannot be
      taught: one must "know" it by experience&mdash;or one should have the
      pride NOT to know it. The fact that at present people all talk of things
      of which they CANNOT have any experience, is true more especially and
      unfortunately as concerns the philosopher and philosophical matters:&mdash;the
      very few know them, are permitted to know them, and all popular ideas
      about them are false. Thus, for instance, the truly philosophical
      combination of a bold, exuberant spirituality which runs at presto pace,
      and a dialectic rigour and necessity which makes no false step, is unknown
      to most thinkers and scholars from their own experience, and therefore,
      should any one speak of it in their presence, it is incredible to them.
      They conceive of every necessity as troublesome, as a painful compulsory
      obedience and state of constraint; thinking itself is regarded by them as
      something slow and hesitating, almost as a trouble, and often enough as
      "worthy of the SWEAT of the noble"&mdash;but not at all as something easy
      and divine, closely related to dancing and exuberance! "To think" and to
      take a matter "seriously," "arduously"&mdash;that is one and the same
      thing to them; such only has been their "experience."&mdash;Artists have
      here perhaps a finer intuition; they who know only too well that precisely
      when they no longer do anything "arbitrarily," and everything of
      necessity, their feeling of freedom, of subtlety, of power, of creatively
      fixing, disposing, and shaping, reaches its climax&mdash;in short, that
      necessity and "freedom of will" are then the same thing with them. There
      is, in fine, a gradation of rank in psychical states, to which the
      gradation of rank in the problems corresponds; and the highest problems
      repel ruthlessly every one who ventures too near them, without being
      predestined for their solution by the loftiness and power of his
      spirituality. Of what use is it for nimble, everyday intellects, or
      clumsy, honest mechanics and empiricists to press, in their plebeian
      ambition, close to such problems, and as it were into this "holy of
      holies"&mdash;as so often happens nowadays! But coarse feet must never
      tread upon such carpets: this is provided for in the primary law of
      things; the doors remain closed to those intruders, though they may dash
      and break their heads thereon. People have always to be born to a high
      station, or, more definitely, they have to be BRED for it: a person has
      only a right to philosophy&mdash;taking the word in its higher
      significance&mdash;in virtue of his descent; the ancestors, the "blood,"
      decide here also. Many generations must have prepared the way for the
      coming of the philosopher; each of his virtues must have been separately
      acquired, nurtured, transmitted, and embodied; not only the bold, easy,
      delicate course and current of his thoughts, but above all the readiness
      for great responsibilities, the majesty of ruling glance and contemning
      look, the feeling of separation from the multitude with their duties and
      virtues, the kindly patronage and defense of whatever is misunderstood and
      calumniated, be it God or devil, the delight and practice of supreme
      justice, the art of commanding, the amplitude of will, the lingering eye
      which rarely admires, rarely looks up, rarely loves....
    </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
