<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Part 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">The Religious Mood</span>
			</h2>
			
    <p>
      45. The human soul and its limits, the range of man's inner experiences
      hitherto attained, the heights, depths, and distances of these
      experiences, the entire history of the soul UP TO THE PRESENT TIME, and
      its still unexhausted possibilities: this is the preordained
      hunting-domain for a born psychologist and lover of a "big hunt". But how
      often must he say despairingly to himself: "A single individual! alas,
      only a single individual! and this great forest, this virgin forest!" So
      he would like to have some hundreds of hunting assistants, and fine
      trained hounds, that he could send into the history of the human soul, to
      drive HIS game together. In vain: again and again he experiences,
      profoundly and bitterly, how difficult it is to find assistants and dogs
      for all the things that directly excite his curiosity. The evil of sending
      scholars into new and dangerous hunting-domains, where courage, sagacity,
      and subtlety in every sense are required, is that they are no longer
      serviceable just when the "BIG hunt," and also the great danger commences,&mdash;it
      is precisely then that they lose their keen eye and nose. In order, for
      instance, to divine and determine what sort of history the problem of
      KNOWLEDGE AND CONSCIENCE has hitherto had in the souls of homines
      religiosi, a person would perhaps himself have to possess as profound, as
      bruised, as immense an experience as the intellectual conscience of
      Pascal; and then he would still require that wide-spread heaven of clear,
      wicked spirituality, which, from above, would be able to oversee, arrange,
      and effectively formulize this mass of dangerous and painful experiences.&mdash;But
      who could do me this service! And who would have time to wait for such
      servants!&mdash;they evidently appear too rarely, they are so improbable
      at all times! Eventually one must do everything ONESELF in order to know
      something; which means that one has MUCH to do!&mdash;But a curiosity like
      mine is once for all the most agreeable of vices&mdash;pardon me! I mean
      to say that the love of truth has its reward in heaven, and already upon
      earth.
    </p>
    <p>
      46. Faith, such as early Christianity desired, and not infrequently
      achieved in the midst of a skeptical and southernly free-spirited world,
      which had centuries of struggle between philosophical schools behind it
      and in it, counting besides the education in tolerance which the Imperium
      Romanum gave&mdash;this faith is NOT that sincere, austere slave-faith by
      which perhaps a Luther or a Cromwell, or some other northern barbarian of
      the spirit remained attached to his God and Christianity, it is much
      rather the faith of Pascal, which resembles in a terrible manner a
      continuous suicide of reason&mdash;a tough, long-lived, worm-like reason,
      which is not to be slain at once and with a single blow. The Christian
      faith from the beginning, is sacrifice the sacrifice of all freedom, all
      pride, all self-confidence of spirit, it is at the same time subjection,
      self-derision, and self-mutilation. There is cruelty and religious
      Phoenicianism in this faith, which is adapted to a tender, many-sided, and
      very fastidious conscience, it takes for granted that the subjection of
      the spirit is indescribably PAINFUL, that all the past and all the habits
      of such a spirit resist the absurdissimum, in the form of which "faith"
      comes to it. Modern men, with their obtuseness as regards all Christian
      nomenclature, have no longer the sense for the terribly superlative
      conception which was implied to an antique taste by the paradox of the
      formula, "God on the Cross". Hitherto there had never and nowhere been
      such boldness in inversion, nor anything at once so dreadful, questioning,
      and questionable as this formula: it promised a transvaluation of all
      ancient values&mdash;It was the Orient, the PROFOUND Orient, it was the
      Oriental slave who thus took revenge on Rome and its noble, light-minded
      toleration, on the Roman "Catholicism" of non-faith, and it was always not
      the faith, but the freedom from the faith, the half-stoical and smiling
      indifference to the seriousness of the faith, which made the slaves
      indignant at their masters and revolt against them. "Enlightenment" causes
      revolt, for the slave desires the unconditioned, he understands nothing
      but the tyrannous, even in morals, he loves as he hates, without NUANCE,
      to the very depths, to the point of pain, to the point of sickness&mdash;his
      many HIDDEN sufferings make him revolt against the noble taste which seems
      to DENY suffering. The skepticism with regard to suffering, fundamentally
      only an attitude of aristocratic morality, was not the least of the
      causes, also, of the last great slave-insurrection which began with the
      French Revolution.
    </p>
    <p>
      47. Wherever the religious neurosis has appeared on the earth so far, we
      find it connected with three dangerous prescriptions as to regimen:
      solitude, fasting, and sexual abstinence&mdash;but without its being
      possible to determine with certainty which is cause and which is effect,
      or IF any relation at all of cause and effect exists there. This latter
      doubt is justified by the fact that one of the most regular symptoms among
      savage as well as among civilized peoples is the most sudden and excessive
      sensuality, which then with equal suddenness transforms into penitential
      paroxysms, world-renunciation, and will-renunciation, both symptoms
      perhaps explainable as disguised epilepsy? But nowhere is it MORE
      obligatory to put aside explanations around no other type has there grown
      such a mass of absurdity and superstition, no other type seems to have
      been more interesting to men and even to philosophers&mdash;perhaps it is
      time to become just a little indifferent here, to learn caution, or,
      better still, to look AWAY, TO GO AWAY&mdash;Yet in the background of the
      most recent philosophy, that of Schopenhauer, we find almost as the
      problem in itself, this terrible note of interrogation of the religious
      crisis and awakening. How is the negation of will POSSIBLE? how is the
      saint possible?&mdash;that seems to have been the very question with which
      Schopenhauer made a start and became a philosopher. And thus it was a
      genuine Schopenhauerian consequence, that his most convinced adherent
      (perhaps also his last, as far as Germany is concerned), namely, Richard
      Wagner, should bring his own life-work to an end just here, and should
      finally put that terrible and eternal type upon the stage as Kundry, type
      vecu, and as it loved and lived, at the very time that the mad-doctors in
      almost all European countries had an opportunity to study the type close
      at hand, wherever the religious neurosis&mdash;or as I call it, "the
      religious mood"&mdash;made its latest epidemical outbreak and display as
      the "Salvation Army"&mdash;If it be a question, however, as to what has
      been so extremely interesting to men of all sorts in all ages, and even to
      philosophers, in the whole phenomenon of the saint, it is undoubtedly the
      appearance of the miraculous therein&mdash;namely, the immediate
      SUCCESSION OF OPPOSITES, of states of the soul regarded as morally
      antithetical: it was believed here to be self-evident that a "bad man" was
      all at once turned into a "saint," a good man. The hitherto existing
      psychology was wrecked at this point, is it not possible it may have
      happened principally because psychology had placed itself under the
      dominion of morals, because it BELIEVED in oppositions of moral values,
      and saw, read, and INTERPRETED these oppositions into the text and facts
      of the case? What? "Miracle" only an error of interpretation? A lack of
      philology?
    </p>
    <p>
      48. It seems that the Latin races are far more deeply attached to their
      Catholicism than we Northerners are to Christianity generally, and that
      consequently unbelief in Catholic countries means something quite
      different from what it does among Protestants&mdash;namely, a sort of
      revolt against the spirit of the race, while with us it is rather a return
      to the spirit (or non-spirit) of the race.
    </p>
    <p>
      We Northerners undoubtedly derive our origin from barbarous races, even as
      regards our talents for religion&mdash;we have POOR talents for it. One
      may make an exception in the case of the Celts, who have theretofore
      furnished also the best soil for Christian infection in the North: the
      Christian ideal blossomed forth in France as much as ever the pale sun of
      the north would allow it. How strangely pious for our taste are still
      these later French skeptics, whenever there is any Celtic blood in their
      origin! How Catholic, how un-German does Auguste Comte's Sociology seem to
      us, with the Roman logic of its instincts! How Jesuitical, that amiable
      and shrewd cicerone of Port Royal, Sainte-Beuve, in spite of all his
      hostility to Jesuits! And even Ernest Renan: how inaccessible to us
      Northerners does the language of such a Renan appear, in whom every
      instant the merest touch of religious thrill throws his refined voluptuous
      and comfortably couching soul off its balance! Let us repeat after him
      these fine sentences&mdash;and what wickedness and haughtiness is
      immediately aroused by way of answer in our probably less beautiful but
      harder souls, that is to say, in our more German souls!&mdash;"DISONS DONC
      HARDIMENT QUE LA RELIGION EST UN PRODUIT DE L'HOMME NORMAL, QUE L'HOMME
      EST LE PLUS DANS LE VRAI QUANT IL EST LE PLUS RELIGIEUX ET LE PLUS ASSURE
      D'UNE DESTINEE INFINIE.... C'EST QUAND IL EST BON QU'IL VEUT QUE LA VIRTU
      CORRESPONDE A UN ORDER ETERNAL, C'EST QUAND IL CONTEMPLE LES CHOSES D'UNE
      MANIERE DESINTERESSEE QU'IL TROUVE LA MORT REVOLTANTE ET ABSURDE. COMMENT
      NE PAS SUPPOSER QUE C'EST DANS CES MOMENTS-LA, QUE L'HOMME VOIT LE
      MIEUX?"... These sentences are so extremely ANTIPODAL to my ears and
      habits of thought, that in my first impulse of rage on finding them, I
      wrote on the margin, "LA NIAISERIE RELIGIEUSE PAR EXCELLENCE!"&mdash;until
      in my later rage I even took a fancy to them, these sentences with their
      truth absolutely inverted! It is so nice and such a distinction to have
      one's own antipodes!
    </p>
    <p>
      49. That which is so astonishing in the religious life of the ancient
      Greeks is the irrestrainable stream of GRATITUDE which it pours forth&mdash;it
      is a very superior kind of man who takes SUCH an attitude towards nature
      and life.&mdash;Later on, when the populace got the upper hand in Greece,
      FEAR became rampant also in religion; and Christianity was preparing
      itself.
    </p>
    <p>
      50. The passion for God: there are churlish, honest-hearted, and
      importunate kinds of it, like that of Luther&mdash;the whole of
      Protestantism lacks the southern DELICATEZZA. There is an Oriental
      exaltation of the mind in it, like that of an undeservedly favoured or
      elevated slave, as in the case of St. Augustine, for instance, who lacks
      in an offensive manner, all nobility in bearing and desires. There is a
      feminine tenderness and sensuality in it, which modestly and unconsciously
      longs for a UNIO MYSTICA ET PHYSICA, as in the case of Madame de Guyon. In
      many cases it appears, curiously enough, as the disguise of a girl's or
      youth's puberty; here and there even as the hysteria of an old maid, also
      as her last ambition. The Church has frequently canonized the woman in
      such a case.
    </p>
    <p>
      51. The mightiest men have hitherto always bowed reverently before the
      saint, as the enigma of self-subjugation and utter voluntary privation&mdash;why
      did they thus bow? They divined in him&mdash;and as it were behind the
      questionableness of his frail and wretched appearance&mdash;the superior
      force which wished to test itself by such a subjugation; the strength of
      will, in which they recognized their own strength and love of power, and
      knew how to honour it: they honoured something in themselves when they
      honoured the saint. In addition to this, the contemplation of the saint
      suggested to them a suspicion: such an enormity of self-negation and
      anti-naturalness will not have been coveted for nothing&mdash;they have
      said, inquiringly. There is perhaps a reason for it, some very great
      danger, about which the ascetic might wish to be more accurately informed
      through his secret interlocutors and visitors? In a word, the mighty ones
      of the world learned to have a new fear before him, they divined a new
      power, a strange, still unconquered enemy:&mdash;it was the "Will to
      Power" which obliged them to halt before the saint. They had to question
      him.
    </p>
    <p>
      52. In the Jewish "Old Testament," the book of divine justice, there are
      men, things, and sayings on such an immense scale, that Greek and Indian
      literature has nothing to compare with it. One stands with fear and
      reverence before those stupendous remains of what man was formerly, and
      one has sad thoughts about old Asia and its little out-pushed peninsula
      Europe, which would like, by all means, to figure before Asia as the
      "Progress of Mankind." To be sure, he who is himself only a slender, tame
      house-animal, and knows only the wants of a house-animal (like our
      cultured people of today, including the Christians of "cultured"
      Christianity), need neither be amazed nor even sad amid those ruins&mdash;the
      taste for the Old Testament is a touchstone with respect to "great" and
      "small": perhaps he will find that the New Testament, the book of grace,
      still appeals more to his heart (there is much of the odour of the
      genuine, tender, stupid beadsman and petty soul in it). To have bound up
      this New Testament (a kind of ROCOCO of taste in every respect) along with
      the Old Testament into one book, as the "Bible," as "The Book in Itself,"
      is perhaps the greatest audacity and "sin against the Spirit" which
      literary Europe has upon its conscience.
    </p>
    <p>
      53. Why Atheism nowadays? "The father" in God is thoroughly refuted;
      equally so "the judge," "the rewarder." Also his "free will": he does not
      hear&mdash;and even if he did, he would not know how to help. The worst is
      that he seems incapable of communicating himself clearly; is he uncertain?&mdash;This
      is what I have made out (by questioning and listening at a variety of
      conversations) to be the cause of the decline of European theism; it
      appears to me that though the religious instinct is in vigorous growth,&mdash;it
      rejects the theistic satisfaction with profound distrust.
    </p>
    <p>
      54. What does all modern philosophy mainly do? Since Descartes&mdash;and
      indeed more in defiance of him than on the basis of his procedure&mdash;an
      ATTENTAT has been made on the part of all philosophers on the old
      conception of the soul, under the guise of a criticism of the subject and
      predicate conception&mdash;that is to say, an ATTENTAT on the fundamental
      presupposition of Christian doctrine. Modern philosophy, as
      epistemological skepticism, is secretly or openly ANTI-CHRISTIAN, although
      (for keener ears, be it said) by no means anti-religious. Formerly, in
      effect, one believed in "the soul" as one believed in grammar and the
      grammatical subject: one said, "I" is the condition, "think" is the
      predicate and is conditioned&mdash;to think is an activity for which one
      MUST suppose a subject as cause. The attempt was then made, with marvelous
      tenacity and subtlety, to see if one could not get out of this net,&mdash;to
      see if the opposite was not perhaps true: "think" the condition, and "I"
      the conditioned; "I," therefore, only a synthesis which has been MADE by
      thinking itself. KANT really wished to prove that, starting from the
      subject, the subject could not be proved&mdash;nor the object either: the
      possibility of an APPARENT EXISTENCE of the subject, and therefore of "the
      soul," may not always have been strange to him,&mdash;the thought which
      once had an immense power on earth as the Vedanta philosophy.
    </p>
    <p>
      55. There is a great ladder of religious cruelty, with many rounds; but
      three of these are the most important. Once on a time men sacrificed human
      beings to their God, and perhaps just those they loved the best&mdash;to
      this category belong the firstling sacrifices of all primitive religions,
      and also the sacrifice of the Emperor Tiberius in the Mithra-Grotto on the
      Island of Capri, that most terrible of all Roman anachronisms. Then,
      during the moral epoch of mankind, they sacrificed to their God the
      strongest instincts they possessed, their "nature"; THIS festal joy shines
      in the cruel glances of ascetics and "anti-natural" fanatics. Finally,
      what still remained to be sacrificed? Was it not necessary in the end for
      men to sacrifice everything comforting, holy, healing, all hope, all faith
      in hidden harmonies, in future blessedness and justice? Was it not
      necessary to sacrifice God himself, and out of cruelty to themselves to
      worship stone, stupidity, gravity, fate, nothingness? To sacrifice God for
      nothingness&mdash;this paradoxical mystery of the ultimate cruelty has
      been reserved for the rising generation; we all know something thereof
      already.
    </p>
    <p>
      56. Whoever, like myself, prompted by some enigmatical desire, has long
      endeavoured to go to the bottom of the question of pessimism and free it
      from the half-Christian, half-German narrowness and stupidity in which it
      has finally presented itself to this century, namely, in the form of
      Schopenhauer's philosophy; whoever, with an Asiatic and super-Asiatic eye,
      has actually looked inside, and into the most world-renouncing of all
      possible modes of thought&mdash;beyond good and evil, and no longer like
      Buddha and Schopenhauer, under the dominion and delusion of morality,&mdash;whoever
      has done this, has perhaps just thereby, without really desiring it,
      opened his eyes to behold the opposite ideal: the ideal of the most
      world-approving, exuberant, and vivacious man, who has not only learnt to
      compromise and arrange with that which was and is, but wishes to have it
      again AS IT WAS AND IS, for all eternity, insatiably calling out da capo,
      not only to himself, but to the whole piece and play; and not only the
      play, but actually to him who requires the play&mdash;and makes it
      necessary; because he always requires himself anew&mdash;and makes himself
      necessary.&mdash;What? And this would not be&mdash;circulus vitiosus deus?
    </p>
    <p>
      57. The distance, and as it were the space around man, grows with the
      strength of his intellectual vision and insight: his world becomes
      profounder; new stars, new enigmas, and notions are ever coming into view.
      Perhaps everything on which the intellectual eye has exercised its
      acuteness and profundity has just been an occasion for its exercise,
      something of a game, something for children and childish minds. Perhaps
      the most solemn conceptions that have caused the most fighting and
      suffering, the conceptions "God" and "sin," will one day seem to us of no
      more importance than a child's plaything or a child's pain seems to an old
      man;&mdash;and perhaps another plaything and another pain will then be
      necessary once more for "the old man"&mdash;always childish enough, an
      eternal child!
    </p>
    <p>
      58. Has it been observed to what extent outward idleness, or
      semi-idleness, is necessary to a real religious life (alike for its
      favourite microscopic labour of self-examination, and for its soft
      placidity called "prayer," the state of perpetual readiness for the
      "coming of God"), I mean the idleness with a good conscience, the idleness
      of olden times and of blood, to which the aristocratic sentiment that work
      is DISHONOURING&mdash;that it vulgarizes body and soul&mdash;is not quite
      unfamiliar? And that consequently the modern, noisy, time-engrossing,
      conceited, foolishly proud laboriousness educates and prepares for
      "unbelief" more than anything else? Among these, for instance, who are at
      present living apart from religion in Germany, I find "free-thinkers" of
      diversified species and origin, but above all a majority of those in whom
      laboriousness from generation to generation has dissolved the religious
      instincts; so that they no longer know what purpose religions serve, and
      only note their existence in the world with a kind of dull astonishment.
      They feel themselves already fully occupied, these good people, be it by
      their business or by their pleasures, not to mention the "Fatherland," and
      the newspapers, and their "family duties"; it seems that they have no time
      whatever left for religion; and above all, it is not obvious to them
      whether it is a question of a new business or a new pleasure&mdash;for it
      is impossible, they say to themselves, that people should go to church
      merely to spoil their tempers. They are by no means enemies of religious
      customs; should certain circumstances, State affairs perhaps, require
      their participation in such customs, they do what is required, as so many
      things are done&mdash;with a patient and unassuming seriousness, and
      without much curiosity or discomfort;&mdash;they live too much apart and
      outside to feel even the necessity for a FOR or AGAINST in such matters.
      Among those indifferent persons may be reckoned nowadays the majority of
      German Protestants of the middle classes, especially in the great
      laborious centres of trade and commerce; also the majority of laborious
      scholars, and the entire University personnel (with the exception of the
      theologians, whose existence and possibility there always gives
      psychologists new and more subtle puzzles to solve). On the part of pious,
      or merely church-going people, there is seldom any idea of HOW MUCH
      good-will, one might say arbitrary will, is now necessary for a German
      scholar to take the problem of religion seriously; his whole profession
      (and as I have said, his whole workmanlike laboriousness, to which he is
      compelled by his modern conscience) inclines him to a lofty and almost
      charitable serenity as regards religion, with which is occasionally
      mingled a slight disdain for the "uncleanliness" of spirit which he takes
      for granted wherever any one still professes to belong to the Church. It
      is only with the help of history (NOT through his own personal experience,
      therefore) that the scholar succeeds in bringing himself to a respectful
      seriousness, and to a certain timid deference in presence of religions;
      but even when his sentiments have reached the stage of gratitude towards
      them, he has not personally advanced one step nearer to that which still
      maintains itself as Church or as piety; perhaps even the contrary. The
      practical indifference to religious matters in the midst of which he has
      been born and brought up, usually sublimates itself in his case into
      circumspection and cleanliness, which shuns contact with religious men and
      things; and it may be just the depth of his tolerance and humanity which
      prompts him to avoid the delicate trouble which tolerance itself brings
      with it.&mdash;Every age has its own divine type of naivete, for the
      discovery of which other ages may envy it: and how much naivete&mdash;adorable,
      childlike, and boundlessly foolish naivete is involved in this belief of
      the scholar in his superiority, in the good conscience of his tolerance,
      in the unsuspecting, simple certainty with which his instinct treats the
      religious man as a lower and less valuable type, beyond, before, and ABOVE
      which he himself has developed&mdash;he, the little arrogant dwarf and
      mob-man, the sedulously alert, head-and-hand drudge of "ideas," of "modern
      ideas"!
    </p>
    <p>
      59. Whoever has seen deeply into the world has doubtless divined what
      wisdom there is in the fact that men are superficial. It is their
      preservative instinct which teaches them to be flighty, lightsome, and
      false. Here and there one finds a passionate and exaggerated adoration of
      "pure forms" in philosophers as well as in artists: it is not to be
      doubted that whoever has NEED of the cult of the superficial to that
      extent, has at one time or another made an unlucky dive BENEATH it.
      Perhaps there is even an order of rank with respect to those burnt
      children, the born artists who find the enjoyment of life only in trying
      to FALSIFY its image (as if taking wearisome revenge on it), one might
      guess to what degree life has disgusted them, by the extent to which they
      wish to see its image falsified, attenuated, ultrified, and deified,&mdash;one
      might reckon the homines religiosi among the artists, as their HIGHEST
      rank. It is the profound, suspicious fear of an incurable pessimism which
      compels whole centuries to fasten their teeth into a religious
      interpretation of existence: the fear of the instinct which divines that
      truth might be attained TOO soon, before man has become strong enough,
      hard enough, artist enough.... Piety, the "Life in God," regarded in this
      light, would appear as the most elaborate and ultimate product of the FEAR
      of truth, as artist-adoration and artist-intoxication in presence of the
      most logical of all falsifications, as the will to the inversion of truth,
      to untruth at any price. Perhaps there has hitherto been no more effective
      means of beautifying man than piety, by means of it man can become so
      artful, so superficial, so iridescent, and so good, that his appearance no
      longer offends.
    </p>
    <p>
      60. To love mankind FOR GOD'S SAKE&mdash;this has so far been the noblest
      and remotest sentiment to which mankind has attained. That love to
      mankind, without any redeeming intention in the background, is only an
      ADDITIONAL folly and brutishness, that the inclination to this love has
      first to get its proportion, its delicacy, its gram of salt and sprinkling
      of ambergris from a higher inclination&mdash;whoever first perceived and
      "experienced" this, however his tongue may have stammered as it attempted
      to express such a delicate matter, let him for all time be holy and
      respected, as the man who has so far flown highest and gone astray in the
      finest fashion!
    </p>
    <p>
      61. The philosopher, as WE free spirits understand him&mdash;as the man of
      the greatest responsibility, who has the conscience for the general
      development of mankind,&mdash;will use religion for his disciplining and
      educating work, just as he will use the contemporary political and
      economic conditions. The selecting and disciplining influence&mdash;destructive,
      as well as creative and fashioning&mdash;which can be exercised by means
      of religion is manifold and varied, according to the sort of people placed
      under its spell and protection. For those who are strong and independent,
      destined and trained to command, in whom the judgment and skill of a
      ruling race is incorporated, religion is an additional means for
      overcoming resistance in the exercise of authority&mdash;as a bond which
      binds rulers and subjects in common, betraying and surrendering to the
      former the conscience of the latter, their inmost heart, which would fain
      escape obedience. And in the case of the unique natures of noble origin,
      if by virtue of superior spirituality they should incline to a more
      retired and contemplative life, reserving to themselves only the more
      refined forms of government (over chosen disciples or members of an
      order), religion itself may be used as a means for obtaining peace from
      the noise and trouble of managing GROSSER affairs, and for securing
      immunity from the UNAVOIDABLE filth of all political agitation. The
      Brahmins, for instance, understood this fact. With the help of a religious
      organization, they secured to themselves the power of nominating kings for
      the people, while their sentiments prompted them to keep apart and
      outside, as men with a higher and super-regal mission. At the same time
      religion gives inducement and opportunity to some of the subjects to
      qualify themselves for future ruling and commanding the slowly ascending
      ranks and classes, in which, through fortunate marriage customs,
      volitional power and delight in self-control are on the increase. To them
      religion offers sufficient incentives and temptations to aspire to higher
      intellectuality, and to experience the sentiments of authoritative
      self-control, of silence, and of solitude. Asceticism and Puritanism are
      almost indispensable means of educating and ennobling a race which seeks
      to rise above its hereditary baseness and work itself upwards to future
      supremacy. And finally, to ordinary men, to the majority of the people,
      who exist for service and general utility, and are only so far entitled to
      exist, religion gives invaluable contentedness with their lot and
      condition, peace of heart, ennoblement of obedience, additional social
      happiness and sympathy, with something of transfiguration and
      embellishment, something of justification of all the commonplaceness, all
      the meanness, all the semi-animal poverty of their souls. Religion,
      together with the religious significance of life, sheds sunshine over such
      perpetually harassed men, and makes even their own aspect endurable to
      them, it operates upon them as the Epicurean philosophy usually operates
      upon sufferers of a higher order, in a refreshing and refining manner,
      almost TURNING suffering TO ACCOUNT, and in the end even hallowing and
      vindicating it. There is perhaps nothing so admirable in Christianity and
      Buddhism as their art of teaching even the lowest to elevate themselves by
      piety to a seemingly higher order of things, and thereby to retain their
      satisfaction with the actual world in which they find it difficult enough
      to live&mdash;this very difficulty being necessary.
    </p>
    <p>
      62. To be sure&mdash;to make also the bad counter-reckoning against such
      religions, and to bring to light their secret dangers&mdash;the cost is
      always excessive and terrible when religions do NOT operate as an
      educational and disciplinary medium in the hands of the philosopher, but
      rule voluntarily and PARAMOUNTLY, when they wish to be the final end, and
      not a means along with other means. Among men, as among all other animals,
      there is a surplus of defective, diseased, degenerating, infirm, and
      necessarily suffering individuals; the successful cases, among men also,
      are always the exception; and in view of the fact that man is THE ANIMAL
      NOT YET PROPERLY ADAPTED TO HIS ENVIRONMENT, the rare exception. But worse
      still. The higher the type a man represents, the greater is the
      improbability that he will SUCCEED; the accidental, the law of
      irrationality in the general constitution of mankind, manifests itself
      most terribly in its destructive effect on the higher orders of men, the
      conditions of whose lives are delicate, diverse, and difficult to
      determine. What, then, is the attitude of the two greatest religions
      above-mentioned to the SURPLUS of failures in life? They endeavour to
      preserve and keep alive whatever can be preserved; in fact, as the
      religions FOR SUFFERERS, they take the part of these upon principle; they
      are always in favour of those who suffer from life as from a disease, and
      they would fain treat every other experience of life as false and
      impossible. However highly we may esteem this indulgent and preservative
      care (inasmuch as in applying to others, it has applied, and applies also
      to the highest and usually the most suffering type of man), the hitherto
      PARAMOUNT religions&mdash;to give a general appreciation of them&mdash;are
      among the principal causes which have kept the type of "man" upon a lower
      level&mdash;they have preserved too much THAT WHICH SHOULD HAVE PERISHED.
      One has to thank them for invaluable services; and who is sufficiently
      rich in gratitude not to feel poor at the contemplation of all that the
      "spiritual men" of Christianity have done for Europe hitherto! But when
      they had given comfort to the sufferers, courage to the oppressed and
      despairing, a staff and support to the helpless, and when they had allured
      from society into convents and spiritual penitentiaries the broken-hearted
      and distracted: what else had they to do in order to work systematically
      in that fashion, and with a good conscience, for the preservation of all
      the sick and suffering, which means, in deed and in truth, to work for the
      DETERIORATION OF THE EUROPEAN RACE? To REVERSE all estimates of value&mdash;THAT
      is what they had to do! And to shatter the strong, to spoil great hopes,
      to cast suspicion on the delight in beauty, to break down everything
      autonomous, manly, conquering, and imperious&mdash;all instincts which are
      natural to the highest and most successful type of "man"&mdash;into
      uncertainty, distress of conscience, and self-destruction; forsooth, to
      invert all love of the earthly and of supremacy over the earth, into
      hatred of the earth and earthly things&mdash;THAT is the task the Church
      imposed on itself, and was obliged to impose, until, according to its
      standard of value, "unworldliness," "unsensuousness," and "higher man"
      fused into one sentiment. If one could observe the strangely painful,
      equally coarse and refined comedy of European Christianity with the
      derisive and impartial eye of an Epicurean god, I should think one would
      never cease marvelling and laughing; does it not actually seem that some
      single will has ruled over Europe for eighteen centuries in order to make
      a SUBLIME ABORTION of man? He, however, who, with opposite requirements
      (no longer Epicurean) and with some divine hammer in his hand, could
      approach this almost voluntary degeneration and stunting of mankind, as
      exemplified in the European Christian (Pascal, for instance), would he not
      have to cry aloud with rage, pity, and horror: "Oh, you bunglers,
      presumptuous pitiful bunglers, what have you done! Was that a work for
      your hands? How you have hacked and botched my finest stone! What have you
      presumed to do!"&mdash;I should say that Christianity has hitherto been
      the most portentous of presumptions. Men, not great enough, nor hard
      enough, to be entitled as artists to take part in fashioning MAN; men, not
      sufficiently strong and far-sighted to ALLOW, with sublime
      self-constraint, the obvious law of the thousandfold failures and
      perishings to prevail; men, not sufficiently noble to see the radically
      different grades of rank and intervals of rank that separate man from man:&mdash;SUCH
      men, with their "equality before God," have hitherto swayed the destiny of
      Europe; until at last a dwarfed, almost ludicrous species has been
      produced, a gregarious animal, something obliging, sickly, mediocre, the
      European of the present day.
    </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
