<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Part 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">Our Virtues</span>
			</h2>
			
    <p>
      214. OUR Virtues?&mdash;It is probable that we, too, have still our
      virtues, although naturally they are not those sincere and massive virtues
      on account of which we hold our grandfathers in esteem and also at a
      little distance from us. We Europeans of the day after tomorrow, we
      firstlings of the twentieth century&mdash;with all our dangerous
      curiosity, our multifariousness and art of disguising, our mellow and
      seemingly sweetened cruelty in sense and spirit&mdash;we shall presumably,
      IF we must have virtues, have those only which have come to agreement with
      our most secret and heartfelt inclinations, with our most ardent
      requirements: well, then, let us look for them in our labyrinths!&mdash;where,
      as we know, so many things lose themselves, so many things get quite lost!
      And is there anything finer than to SEARCH for one's own virtues? Is it
      not almost to BELIEVE in one's own virtues? But this "believing in one's
      own virtues"&mdash;is it not practically the same as what was formerly
      called one's "good conscience," that long, respectable pigtail of an idea,
      which our grandfathers used to hang behind their heads, and often enough
      also behind their understandings? It seems, therefore, that however little
      we may imagine ourselves to be old-fashioned and grandfatherly respectable
      in other respects, in one thing we are nevertheless the worthy
      grandchildren of our grandfathers, we last Europeans with good
      consciences: we also still wear their pigtail.&mdash;Ah! if you only knew
      how soon, so very soon&mdash;it will be different!
    </p>
    <p>
      215. As in the stellar firmament there are sometimes two suns which
      determine the path of one planet, and in certain cases suns of different
      colours shine around a single planet, now with red light, now with green,
      and then simultaneously illumine and flood it with motley colours: so we
      modern men, owing to the complicated mechanism of our "firmament," are
      determined by DIFFERENT moralities; our actions shine alternately in
      different colours, and are seldom unequivocal&mdash;and there are often
      cases, also, in which our actions are MOTLEY-COLOURED.
    </p>
    <p>
      216. To love one's enemies? I think that has been well learnt: it takes
      place thousands of times at present on a large and small scale; indeed, at
      times the higher and sublimer thing takes place:&mdash;we learn to DESPISE
      when we love, and precisely when we love best; all of it, however,
      unconsciously, without noise, without ostentation, with the shame and
      secrecy of goodness, which forbids the utterance of the pompous word and
      the formula of virtue. Morality as attitude&mdash;is opposed to our taste
      nowadays. This is ALSO an advance, as it was an advance in our fathers
      that religion as an attitude finally became opposed to their taste,
      including the enmity and Voltairean bitterness against religion (and all
      that formerly belonged to freethinker-pantomime). It is the music in our
      conscience, the dance in our spirit, to which Puritan litanies, moral
      sermons, and goody-goodness won't chime.
    </p>
    <p>
      217. Let us be careful in dealing with those who attach great importance
      to being credited with moral tact and subtlety in moral discernment! They
      never forgive us if they have once made a mistake BEFORE us (or even with
      REGARD to us)&mdash;they inevitably become our instinctive calumniators
      and detractors, even when they still remain our "friends."&mdash;Blessed
      are the forgetful: for they "get the better" even of their blunders.
    </p>
    <p>
      218. The psychologists of France&mdash;and where else are there still
      psychologists nowadays?&mdash;have never yet exhausted their bitter and
      manifold enjoyment of the betise bourgeoise, just as though... in short,
      they betray something thereby. Flaubert, for instance, the honest citizen
      of Rouen, neither saw, heard, nor tasted anything else in the end; it was
      his mode of self-torment and refined cruelty. As this is growing
      wearisome, I would now recommend for a change something else for a
      pleasure&mdash;namely, the unconscious astuteness with which good, fat,
      honest mediocrity always behaves towards loftier spirits and the tasks
      they have to perform, the subtle, barbed, Jesuitical astuteness, which is
      a thousand times subtler than the taste and understanding of the
      middle-class in its best moments&mdash;subtler even than the understanding
      of its victims:&mdash;a repeated proof that "instinct" is the most
      intelligent of all kinds of intelligence which have hitherto been
      discovered. In short, you psychologists, study the philosophy of the
      "rule" in its struggle with the "exception": there you have a spectacle
      fit for Gods and godlike malignity! Or, in plainer words, practise
      vivisection on "good people," on the "homo bonae voluntatis," ON
      YOURSELVES!
    </p>
    <p>
      219. The practice of judging and condemning morally, is the favourite
      revenge of the intellectually shallow on those who are less so, it is also
      a kind of indemnity for their being badly endowed by nature, and finally,
      it is an opportunity for acquiring spirit and BECOMING subtle&mdash;malice
      spiritualises. They are glad in their inmost heart that there is a
      standard according to which those who are over-endowed with intellectual
      goods and privileges, are equal to them, they contend for the "equality of
      all before God," and almost NEED the belief in God for this purpose. It is
      among them that the most powerful antagonists of atheism are found. If any
      one were to say to them "A lofty spirituality is beyond all comparison
      with the honesty and respectability of a merely moral man"&mdash;it would
      make them furious, I shall take care not to say so. I would rather flatter
      them with my theory that lofty spirituality itself exists only as the
      ultimate product of moral qualities, that it is a synthesis of all
      qualities attributed to the "merely moral" man, after they have been
      acquired singly through long training and practice, perhaps during a whole
      series of generations, that lofty spirituality is precisely the
      spiritualising of justice, and the beneficent severity which knows that it
      is authorized to maintain GRADATIONS OF RANK in the world, even among
      things&mdash;and not only among men.
    </p>
    <p>
      220. Now that the praise of the "disinterested person" is so popular one
      must&mdash;probably not without some danger&mdash;get an idea of WHAT
      people actually take an interest in, and what are the things generally
      which fundamentally and profoundly concern ordinary men&mdash;including
      the cultured, even the learned, and perhaps philosophers also, if
      appearances do not deceive. The fact thereby becomes obvious that the
      greater part of what interests and charms higher natures, and more refined
      and fastidious tastes, seems absolutely "uninteresting" to the average man&mdash;if,
      notwithstanding, he perceive devotion to these interests, he calls it
      desinteresse, and wonders how it is possible to act "disinterestedly."
      There have been philosophers who could give this popular astonishment a
      seductive and mystical, other-worldly expression (perhaps because they did
      not know the higher nature by experience?), instead of stating the naked
      and candidly reasonable truth that "disinterested" action is very
      interesting and "interested" action, provided that... "And love?"&mdash;What!
      Even an action for love's sake shall be "unegoistic"? But you fools&mdash;!
      "And the praise of the self-sacrificer?"&mdash;But whoever has really
      offered sacrifice knows that he wanted and obtained something for it&mdash;perhaps
      something from himself for something from himself; that he relinquished
      here in order to have more there, perhaps in general to be more, or even
      feel himself "more." But this is a realm of questions and answers in which
      a more fastidious spirit does not like to stay: for here truth has to
      stifle her yawns so much when she is obliged to answer. And after all,
      truth is a woman; one must not use force with her.
    </p>
    <p>
      221. "It sometimes happens," said a moralistic pedant and trifle-retailer,
      "that I honour and respect an unselfish man: not, however, because he is
      unselfish, but because I think he has a right to be useful to another man
      at his own expense. In short, the question is always who HE is, and who
      THE OTHER is. For instance, in a person created and destined for command,
      self-denial and modest retirement, instead of being virtues, would be the
      waste of virtues: so it seems to me. Every system of unegoistic morality
      which takes itself unconditionally and appeals to every one, not only sins
      against good taste, but is also an incentive to sins of omission, an
      ADDITIONAL seduction under the mask of philanthropy&mdash;and precisely a
      seduction and injury to the higher, rarer, and more privileged types of
      men. Moral systems must be compelled first of all to bow before the
      GRADATIONS OF RANK; their presumption must be driven home to their
      conscience&mdash;until they thoroughly understand at last that it is
      IMMORAL to say that 'what is right for one is proper for another.'"&mdash;So
      said my moralistic pedant and bonhomme. Did he perhaps deserve to be
      laughed at when he thus exhorted systems of morals to practise morality?
      But one should not be too much in the right if one wishes to have the
      laughers on ONE'S OWN side; a grain of wrong pertains even to good taste.
    </p>
    <p>
      222. Wherever sympathy (fellow-suffering) is preached nowadays&mdash;and,
      if I gather rightly, no other religion is any longer preached&mdash;let
      the psychologist have his ears open through all the vanity, through all
      the noise which is natural to these preachers (as to all preachers), he
      will hear a hoarse, groaning, genuine note of SELF-CONTEMPT. It belongs to
      the overshadowing and uglifying of Europe, which has been on the increase
      for a century (the first symptoms of which are already specified
      documentarily in a thoughtful letter of Galiani to Madame d'Epinay)&mdash;IF
      IT IS NOT REALLY THE CAUSE THEREOF! The man of "modern ideas," the
      conceited ape, is excessively dissatisfied with himself&mdash;this is
      perfectly certain. He suffers, and his vanity wants him only "to suffer
      with his fellows."
    </p>
    <p>
      223. The hybrid European&mdash;a tolerably ugly plebeian, taken all in all&mdash;absolutely
      requires a costume: he needs history as a storeroom of costumes. To be
      sure, he notices that none of the costumes fit him properly&mdash;he
      changes and changes. Let us look at the nineteenth century with respect to
      these hasty preferences and changes in its masquerades of style, and also
      with respect to its moments of desperation on account of "nothing suiting"
      us. It is in vain to get ourselves up as romantic, or classical, or
      Christian, or Florentine, or barocco, or "national," in moribus et
      artibus: it does not "clothe us"! But the "spirit," especially the
      "historical spirit," profits even by this desperation: once and again a
      new sample of the past or of the foreign is tested, put on, taken off,
      packed up, and above all studied&mdash;we are the first studious age in
      puncto of "costumes," I mean as concerns morals, articles of belief,
      artistic tastes, and religions; we are prepared as no other age has ever
      been for a carnival in the grand style, for the most spiritual festival&mdash;laughter
      and arrogance, for the transcendental height of supreme folly and
      Aristophanic ridicule of the world. Perhaps we are still discovering the
      domain of our invention just here, the domain where even we can still be
      original, probably as parodists of the world's history and as God's
      Merry-Andrews,&mdash;perhaps, though nothing else of the present have a
      future, our laughter itself may have a future!
    </p>
    <p>
      224. The historical sense (or the capacity for divining quickly the order
      of rank of the valuations according to which a people, a community, or an
      individual has lived, the "divining instinct" for the relationships of
      these valuations, for the relation of the authority of the valuations to
      the authority of the operating forces),&mdash;this historical sense, which
      we Europeans claim as our specialty, has come to us in the train of the
      enchanting and mad semi-barbarity into which Europe has been plunged by
      the democratic mingling of classes and races&mdash;it is only the
      nineteenth century that has recognized this faculty as its sixth sense.
      Owing to this mingling, the past of every form and mode of life, and of
      cultures which were formerly closely contiguous and superimposed on one
      another, flows forth into us "modern souls"; our instincts now run back in
      all directions, we ourselves are a kind of chaos: in the end, as we have
      said, the spirit perceives its advantage therein. By means of our
      semi-barbarity in body and in desire, we have secret access everywhere,
      such as a noble age never had; we have access above all to the labyrinth
      of imperfect civilizations, and to every form of semi-barbarity that has
      at any time existed on earth; and in so far as the most considerable part
      of human civilization hitherto has just been semi-barbarity, the
      "historical sense" implies almost the sense and instinct for everything,
      the taste and tongue for everything: whereby it immediately proves itself
      to be an IGNOBLE sense. For instance, we enjoy Homer once more: it is
      perhaps our happiest acquisition that we know how to appreciate Homer,
      whom men of distinguished culture (as the French of the seventeenth
      century, like Saint-Evremond, who reproached him for his ESPRIT VASTE, and
      even Voltaire, the last echo of the century) cannot and could not so
      easily appropriate&mdash;whom they scarcely permitted themselves to enjoy.
      The very decided Yea and Nay of their palate, their promptly ready
      disgust, their hesitating reluctance with regard to everything strange,
      their horror of the bad taste even of lively curiosity, and in general the
      averseness of every distinguished and self-sufficing culture to avow a new
      desire, a dissatisfaction with its own condition, or an admiration of what
      is strange: all this determines and disposes them unfavourably even
      towards the best things of the world which are not their property or could
      not become their prey&mdash;and no faculty is more unintelligible to such
      men than just this historical sense, with its truckling, plebeian
      curiosity. The case is not different with Shakespeare, that marvelous
      Spanish-Moorish-Saxon synthesis of taste, over whom an ancient Athenian of
      the circle of AEschylus would have half-killed himself with laughter or
      irritation: but we&mdash;accept precisely this wild motleyness, this
      medley of the most delicate, the most coarse, and the most artificial,
      with a secret confidence and cordiality; we enjoy it as a refinement of
      art reserved expressly for us, and allow ourselves to be as little
      disturbed by the repulsive fumes and the proximity of the English populace
      in which Shakespeare's art and taste lives, as perhaps on the Chiaja of
      Naples, where, with all our senses awake, we go our way, enchanted and
      voluntarily, in spite of the drain-odour of the lower quarters of the
      town. That as men of the "historical sense" we have our virtues, is not to
      be disputed:&mdash;we are unpretentious, unselfish, modest, brave,
      habituated to self-control and self-renunciation, very grateful, very
      patient, very complaisant&mdash;but with all this we are perhaps not very
      "tasteful." Let us finally confess it, that what is most difficult for us
      men of the "historical sense" to grasp, feel, taste, and love, what finds
      us fundamentally prejudiced and almost hostile, is precisely the
      perfection and ultimate maturity in every culture and art, the essentially
      noble in works and men, their moment of smooth sea and halcyon
      self-sufficiency, the goldenness and coldness which all things show that
      have perfected themselves. Perhaps our great virtue of the historical
      sense is in necessary contrast to GOOD taste, at least to the very bad
      taste; and we can only evoke in ourselves imperfectly, hesitatingly, and
      with compulsion the small, short, and happy godsends and glorifications of
      human life as they shine here and there: those moments and marvelous
      experiences when a great power has voluntarily come to a halt before the
      boundless and infinite,&mdash;when a super-abundance of refined delight
      has been enjoyed by a sudden checking and petrifying, by standing firmly
      and planting oneself fixedly on still trembling ground. PROPORTIONATENESS
      is strange to us, let us confess it to ourselves; our itching is really
      the itching for the infinite, the immeasurable. Like the rider on his
      forward panting horse, we let the reins fall before the infinite, we
      modern men, we semi-barbarians&mdash;and are only in OUR highest bliss
      when we&mdash;ARE IN MOST DANGER.
    </p>
    <p>
      225. Whether it be hedonism, pessimism, utilitarianism, or eudaemonism,
      all those modes of thinking which measure the worth of things according to
      PLEASURE and PAIN, that is, according to accompanying circumstances and
      secondary considerations, are plausible modes of thought and naivetes,
      which every one conscious of CREATIVE powers and an artist's conscience
      will look down upon with scorn, though not without sympathy. Sympathy for
      you!&mdash;to be sure, that is not sympathy as you understand it: it is
      not sympathy for social "distress," for "society" with its sick and
      misfortuned, for the hereditarily vicious and defective who lie on the
      ground around us; still less is it sympathy for the grumbling, vexed,
      revolutionary slave-classes who strive after power&mdash;they call it
      "freedom." OUR sympathy is a loftier and further-sighted sympathy:&mdash;we
      see how MAN dwarfs himself, how YOU dwarf him! and there are moments when
      we view YOUR sympathy with an indescribable anguish, when we resist it,&mdash;when
      we regard your seriousness as more dangerous than any kind of levity. You
      want, if possible&mdash;and there is not a more foolish "if possible"&mdash;TO
      DO AWAY WITH SUFFERING; and we?&mdash;it really seems that WE would rather
      have it increased and made worse than it has ever been! Well-being, as you
      understand it&mdash;is certainly not a goal; it seems to us an END; a
      condition which at once renders man ludicrous and contemptible&mdash;and
      makes his destruction DESIRABLE! The discipline of suffering, of GREAT
      suffering&mdash;know ye not that it is only THIS discipline that has
      produced all the elevations of humanity hitherto? The tension of soul in
      misfortune which communicates to it its energy, its shuddering in view of
      rack and ruin, its inventiveness and bravery in undergoing, enduring,
      interpreting, and exploiting misfortune, and whatever depth, mystery,
      disguise, spirit, artifice, or greatness has been bestowed upon the soul&mdash;has
      it not been bestowed through suffering, through the discipline of great
      suffering? In man CREATURE and CREATOR are united: in man there is not
      only matter, shred, excess, clay, mire, folly, chaos; but there is also
      the creator, the sculptor, the hardness of the hammer, the divinity of the
      spectator, and the seventh day&mdash;do ye understand this contrast? And
      that YOUR sympathy for the "creature in man" applies to that which has to
      be fashioned, bruised, forged, stretched, roasted, annealed, refined&mdash;to
      that which must necessarily SUFFER, and IS MEANT to suffer? And our
      sympathy&mdash;do ye not understand what our REVERSE sympathy applies to,
      when it resists your sympathy as the worst of all pampering and
      enervation?&mdash;So it is sympathy AGAINST sympathy!&mdash;But to repeat
      it once more, there are higher problems than the problems of pleasure and
      pain and sympathy; and all systems of philosophy which deal only with
      these are naivetes.
    </p>
    <p>
      226. WE IMMORALISTS.&mdash;This world with which WE are concerned, in
      which we have to fear and love, this almost invisible, inaudible world of
      delicate command and delicate obedience, a world of "almost" in every
      respect, captious, insidious, sharp, and tender&mdash;yes, it is well
      protected from clumsy spectators and familiar curiosity! We are woven into
      a strong net and garment of duties, and CANNOT disengage ourselves&mdash;precisely
      here, we are "men of duty," even we! Occasionally, it is true, we dance in
      our "chains" and betwixt our "swords"; it is none the less true that more
      often we gnash our teeth under the circumstances, and are impatient at the
      secret hardship of our lot. But do what we will, fools and appearances say
      of us: "These are men WITHOUT duty,"&mdash;we have always fools and
      appearances against us!
    </p>
    <p>
      227. Honesty, granting that it is the virtue of which we cannot rid
      ourselves, we free spirits&mdash;well, we will labour at it with all our
      perversity and love, and not tire of "perfecting" ourselves in OUR virtue,
      which alone remains: may its glance some day overspread like a gilded,
      blue, mocking twilight this aging civilization with its dull gloomy
      seriousness! And if, nevertheless, our honesty should one day grow weary,
      and sigh, and stretch its limbs, and find us too hard, and would fain have
      it pleasanter, easier, and gentler, like an agreeable vice, let us remain
      HARD, we latest Stoics, and let us send to its help whatever devilry we
      have in us:&mdash;our disgust at the clumsy and undefined, our "NITIMUR IN
      VETITUM," our love of adventure, our sharpened and fastidious curiosity,
      our most subtle, disguised, intellectual Will to Power and universal
      conquest, which rambles and roves avidiously around all the realms of the
      future&mdash;let us go with all our "devils" to the help of our "God"! It
      is probable that people will misunderstand and mistake us on that account:
      what does it matter! They will say: "Their 'honesty'&mdash;that is their
      devilry, and nothing else!" What does it matter! And even if they were
      right&mdash;have not all Gods hitherto been such sanctified, re-baptized
      devils? And after all, what do we know of ourselves? And what the spirit
      that leads us wants TO BE CALLED? (It is a question of names.) And how
      many spirits we harbour? Our honesty, we free spirits&mdash;let us be
      careful lest it become our vanity, our ornament and ostentation, our
      limitation, our stupidity! Every virtue inclines to stupidity, every
      stupidity to virtue; "stupid to the point of sanctity," they say in
      Russia,&mdash;let us be careful lest out of pure honesty we eventually
      become saints and bores! Is not life a hundred times too short for us&mdash;to
      bore ourselves? One would have to believe in eternal life in order to...
    </p>
    <p>
      228. I hope to be forgiven for discovering that all moral philosophy
      hitherto has been tedious and has belonged to the soporific appliances&mdash;and
      that "virtue," in my opinion, has been MORE injured by the TEDIOUSNESS of
      its advocates than by anything else; at the same time, however, I would
      not wish to overlook their general usefulness. It is desirable that as few
      people as possible should reflect upon morals, and consequently it is very
      desirable that morals should not some day become interesting! But let us
      not be afraid! Things still remain today as they have always been: I see
      no one in Europe who has (or DISCLOSES) an idea of the fact that
      philosophizing concerning morals might be conducted in a dangerous,
      captious, and ensnaring manner&mdash;that CALAMITY might be involved
      therein. Observe, for example, the indefatigable, inevitable English
      utilitarians: how ponderously and respectably they stalk on, stalk along
      (a Homeric metaphor expresses it better) in the footsteps of Bentham, just
      as he had already stalked in the footsteps of the respectable Helvetius!
      (no, he was not a dangerous man, Helvetius, CE SENATEUR POCOCURANTE, to
      use an expression of Galiani). No new thought, nothing of the nature of a
      finer turning or better expression of an old thought, not even a proper
      history of what has been previously thought on the subject: an IMPOSSIBLE
      literature, taking it all in all, unless one knows how to leaven it with
      some mischief. In effect, the old English vice called CANT, which is MORAL
      TARTUFFISM, has insinuated itself also into these moralists (whom one must
      certainly read with an eye to their motives if one MUST read them),
      concealed this time under the new form of the scientific spirit; moreover,
      there is not absent from them a secret struggle with the pangs of
      conscience, from which a race of former Puritans must naturally suffer, in
      all their scientific tinkering with morals. (Is not a moralist the
      opposite of a Puritan? That is to say, as a thinker who regards morality
      as questionable, as worthy of interrogation, in short, as a problem? Is
      moralizing not-immoral?) In the end, they all want English morality to be
      recognized as authoritative, inasmuch as mankind, or the "general
      utility," or "the happiness of the greatest number,"&mdash;no! the
      happiness of ENGLAND, will be best served thereby. They would like, by all
      means, to convince themselves that the striving after English happiness, I
      mean after COMFORT and FASHION (and in the highest instance, a seat in
      Parliament), is at the same time the true path of virtue; in fact, that in
      so far as there has been virtue in the world hitherto, it has just
      consisted in such striving. Not one of those ponderous,
      conscience-stricken herding-animals (who undertake to advocate the cause
      of egoism as conducive to the general welfare) wants to have any knowledge
      or inkling of the facts that the "general welfare" is no ideal, no goal,
      no notion that can be at all grasped, but is only a nostrum,&mdash;that
      what is fair to one MAY NOT at all be fair to another, that the
      requirement of one morality for all is really a detriment to higher men,
      in short, that there is a DISTINCTION OF RANK between man and man, and
      consequently between morality and morality. They are an unassuming and
      fundamentally mediocre species of men, these utilitarian Englishmen, and,
      as already remarked, in so far as they are tedious, one cannot think
      highly enough of their utility. One ought even to ENCOURAGE them, as has
      been partially attempted in the following rhymes:&mdash;
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
    Hail, ye worthies, barrow-wheeling,
    "Longer&mdash;better," aye revealing,

    Stiffer aye in head and knee;
    Unenraptured, never jesting,
    Mediocre everlasting,

    SANS GENIE ET SANS ESPRIT!
</pre>
    <p>
      229. In these later ages, which may be proud of their humanity, there
      still remains so much fear, so much SUPERSTITION of the fear, of the
      "cruel wild beast," the mastering of which constitutes the very pride of
      these humaner ages&mdash;that even obvious truths, as if by the agreement
      of centuries, have long remained unuttered, because they have the
      appearance of helping the finally slain wild beast back to life again. I
      perhaps risk something when I allow such a truth to escape; let others
      capture it again and give it so much "milk of pious sentiment" [FOOTNOTE:
      An expression from Schiller's William Tell, Act IV, Scene 3.] to drink,
      that it will lie down quiet and forgotten, in its old corner.&mdash;One
      ought to learn anew about cruelty, and open one's eyes; one ought at last
      to learn impatience, in order that such immodest gross errors&mdash;as,
      for instance, have been fostered by ancient and modern philosophers with
      regard to tragedy&mdash;may no longer wander about virtuously and boldly.
      Almost everything that we call "higher culture" is based upon the
      spiritualising and intensifying of CRUELTY&mdash;this is my thesis; the
      "wild beast" has not been slain at all, it lives, it flourishes, it has
      only been&mdash;transfigured. That which constitutes the painful delight
      of tragedy is cruelty; that which operates agreeably in so-called tragic
      sympathy, and at the basis even of everything sublime, up to the highest
      and most delicate thrills of metaphysics, obtains its sweetness solely
      from the intermingled ingredient of cruelty. What the Roman enjoys in the
      arena, the Christian in the ecstasies of the cross, the Spaniard at the
      sight of the faggot and stake, or of the bull-fight, the present-day
      Japanese who presses his way to the tragedy, the workman of the Parisian
      suburbs who has a homesickness for bloody revolutions, the Wagnerienne
      who, with unhinged will, "undergoes" the performance of "Tristan and
      Isolde"&mdash;what all these enjoy, and strive with mysterious ardour to
      drink in, is the philtre of the great Circe "cruelty." Here, to be sure,
      we must put aside entirely the blundering psychology of former times,
      which could only teach with regard to cruelty that it originated at the
      sight of the suffering of OTHERS: there is an abundant, super-abundant
      enjoyment even in one's own suffering, in causing one's own suffering&mdash;and
      wherever man has allowed himself to be persuaded to self-denial in the
      RELIGIOUS sense, or to self-mutilation, as among the Phoenicians and
      ascetics, or in general, to desensualisation, decarnalisation, and
      contrition, to Puritanical repentance-spasms, to vivisection of conscience
      and to Pascal-like SACRIFIZIA DELL' INTELLETO, he is secretly allured and
      impelled forwards by his cruelty, by the dangerous thrill of cruelty
      TOWARDS HIMSELF.&mdash;Finally, let us consider that even the seeker of
      knowledge operates as an artist and glorifier of cruelty, in that he
      compels his spirit to perceive AGAINST its own inclination, and often
      enough against the wishes of his heart:&mdash;he forces it to say Nay,
      where he would like to affirm, love, and adore; indeed, every instance of
      taking a thing profoundly and fundamentally, is a violation, an
      intentional injuring of the fundamental will of the spirit, which
      instinctively aims at appearance and superficiality,&mdash;even in every
      desire for knowledge there is a drop of cruelty.
    </p>
    <p>
      230. Perhaps what I have said here about a "fundamental will of the
      spirit" may not be understood without further details; I may be allowed a
      word of explanation.&mdash;That imperious something which is popularly
      called "the spirit," wishes to be master internally and externally, and to
      feel itself master; it has the will of a multiplicity for a simplicity, a
      binding, taming, imperious, and essentially ruling will. Its requirements
      and capacities here, are the same as those assigned by physiologists to
      everything that lives, grows, and multiplies. The power of the spirit to
      appropriate foreign elements reveals itself in a strong tendency to
      assimilate the new to the old, to simplify the manifold, to overlook or
      repudiate the absolutely contradictory; just as it arbitrarily
      re-underlines, makes prominent, and falsifies for itself certain traits
      and lines in the foreign elements, in every portion of the "outside
      world." Its object thereby is the incorporation of new "experiences," the
      assortment of new things in the old arrangements&mdash;in short, growth;
      or more properly, the FEELING of growth, the feeling of increased power&mdash;is
      its object. This same will has at its service an apparently opposed
      impulse of the spirit, a suddenly adopted preference of ignorance, of
      arbitrary shutting out, a closing of windows, an inner denial of this or
      that, a prohibition to approach, a sort of defensive attitude against much
      that is knowable, a contentment with obscurity, with the shutting-in
      horizon, an acceptance and approval of ignorance: as that which is all
      necessary according to the degree of its appropriating power, its
      "digestive power," to speak figuratively (and in fact "the spirit"
      resembles a stomach more than anything else). Here also belong an
      occasional propensity of the spirit to let itself be deceived (perhaps
      with a waggish suspicion that it is NOT so and so, but is only allowed to
      pass as such), a delight in uncertainty and ambiguity, an exulting
      enjoyment of arbitrary, out-of-the-way narrowness and mystery, of the
      too-near, of the foreground, of the magnified, the diminished, the
      misshapen, the beautified&mdash;an enjoyment of the arbitrariness of all
      these manifestations of power. Finally, in this connection, there is the
      not unscrupulous readiness of the spirit to deceive other spirits and
      dissemble before them&mdash;the constant pressing and straining of a
      creating, shaping, changeable power: the spirit enjoys therein its
      craftiness and its variety of disguises, it enjoys also its feeling of
      security therein&mdash;it is precisely by its Protean arts that it is best
      protected and concealed!&mdash;COUNTER TO this propensity for appearance,
      for simplification, for a disguise, for a cloak, in short, for an outside&mdash;for
      every outside is a cloak&mdash;there operates the sublime tendency of the
      man of knowledge, which takes, and INSISTS on taking things profoundly,
      variously, and thoroughly; as a kind of cruelty of the intellectual
      conscience and taste, which every courageous thinker will acknowledge in
      himself, provided, as it ought to be, that he has sharpened and hardened
      his eye sufficiently long for introspection, and is accustomed to severe
      discipline and even severe words. He will say: "There is something cruel
      in the tendency of my spirit": let the virtuous and amiable try to
      convince him that it is not so! In fact, it would sound nicer, if, instead
      of our cruelty, perhaps our "extravagant honesty" were talked about,
      whispered about, and glorified&mdash;we free, VERY free spirits&mdash;and
      some day perhaps SUCH will actually be our&mdash;posthumous glory!
      Meanwhile&mdash;for there is plenty of time until then&mdash;we should be
      least inclined to deck ourselves out in such florid and fringed moral
      verbiage; our whole former work has just made us sick of this taste and
      its sprightly exuberance. They are beautiful, glistening, jingling,
      festive words: honesty, love of truth, love of wisdom, sacrifice for
      knowledge, heroism of the truthful&mdash;there is something in them that
      makes one's heart swell with pride. But we anchorites and marmots have
      long ago persuaded ourselves in all the secrecy of an anchorite's
      conscience, that this worthy parade of verbiage also belongs to the old
      false adornment, frippery, and gold-dust of unconscious human vanity, and
      that even under such flattering colour and repainting, the terrible
      original text HOMO NATURA must again be recognized. In effect, to
      translate man back again into nature; to master the many vain and
      visionary interpretations and subordinate meanings which have hitherto
      been scratched and daubed over the eternal original text, HOMO NATURA; to
      bring it about that man shall henceforth stand before man as he now,
      hardened by the discipline of science, stands before the OTHER forms of
      nature, with fearless Oedipus-eyes, and stopped Ulysses-ears, deaf to the
      enticements of old metaphysical bird-catchers, who have piped to him far
      too long: "Thou art more! thou art higher! thou hast a different origin!"&mdash;this
      may be a strange and foolish task, but that it is a TASK, who can deny!
      Why did we choose it, this foolish task? Or, to put the question
      differently: "Why knowledge at all?" Every one will ask us about this. And
      thus pressed, we, who have asked ourselves the question a hundred times,
      have not found and cannot find any better answer....
    </p>
    <p>
      231. Learning alters us, it does what all nourishment does that does not
      merely "conserve"&mdash;as the physiologist knows. But at the bottom of
      our souls, quite "down below," there is certainly something unteachable, a
      granite of spiritual fate, of predetermined decision and answer to
      predetermined, chosen questions. In each cardinal problem there speaks an
      unchangeable "I am this"; a thinker cannot learn anew about man and woman,
      for instance, but can only learn fully&mdash;he can only follow to the end
      what is "fixed" about them in himself. Occasionally we find certain
      solutions of problems which make strong beliefs for us; perhaps they are
      henceforth called "convictions." Later on&mdash;one sees in them only
      footsteps to self-knowledge, guide-posts to the problem which we ourselves
      ARE&mdash;or more correctly to the great stupidity which we embody, our
      spiritual fate, the UNTEACHABLE in us, quite "down below."&mdash;In view
      of this liberal compliment which I have just paid myself, permission will
      perhaps be more readily allowed me to utter some truths about "woman as
      she is," provided that it is known at the outset how literally they are
      merely&mdash;MY truths.
    </p>
    <p>
      232. Woman wishes to be independent, and therefore she begins to enlighten
      men about "woman as she is"&mdash;THIS is one of the worst developments of
      the general UGLIFYING of Europe. For what must these clumsy attempts of
      feminine scientificality and self-exposure bring to light! Woman has so
      much cause for shame; in woman there is so much pedantry, superficiality,
      schoolmasterliness, petty presumption, unbridledness, and indiscretion
      concealed&mdash;study only woman's behaviour towards children!&mdash;which
      has really been best restrained and dominated hitherto by the FEAR of man.
      Alas, if ever the "eternally tedious in woman"&mdash;she has plenty of it!&mdash;is
      allowed to venture forth! if she begins radically and on principle to
      unlearn her wisdom and art-of charming, of playing, of frightening away
      sorrow, of alleviating and taking easily; if she forgets her delicate
      aptitude for agreeable desires! Female voices are already raised, which,
      by Saint Aristophanes! make one afraid:&mdash;with medical explicitness it
      is stated in a threatening manner what woman first and last REQUIRES from
      man. Is it not in the very worst taste that woman thus sets herself up to
      be scientific? Enlightenment hitherto has fortunately been men's affair,
      men's gift&mdash;we remained therewith "among ourselves"; and in the end,
      in view of all that women write about "woman," we may well have
      considerable doubt as to whether woman really DESIRES enlightenment about
      herself&mdash;and CAN desire it. If woman does not thereby seek a new
      ORNAMENT for herself&mdash;I believe ornamentation belongs to the
      eternally feminine?&mdash;why, then, she wishes to make herself feared:
      perhaps she thereby wishes to get the mastery. But she does not want truth&mdash;what
      does woman care for truth? From the very first, nothing is more foreign,
      more repugnant, or more hostile to woman than truth&mdash;her great art is
      falsehood, her chief concern is appearance and beauty. Let us confess it,
      we men: we honour and love this very art and this very instinct in woman:
      we who have the hard task, and for our recreation gladly seek the company
      of beings under whose hands, glances, and delicate follies, our
      seriousness, our gravity, and profundity appear almost like follies to us.
      Finally, I ask the question: Did a woman herself ever acknowledge
      profundity in a woman's mind, or justice in a woman's heart? And is it not
      true that on the whole "woman" has hitherto been most despised by woman
      herself, and not at all by us?&mdash;We men desire that woman should not
      continue to compromise herself by enlightening us; just as it was man's
      care and the consideration for woman, when the church decreed: mulier
      taceat in ecclesia. It was to the benefit of woman when Napoleon gave the
      too eloquent Madame de Stael to understand: mulier taceat in politicis!&mdash;and
      in my opinion, he is a true friend of woman who calls out to women today:
      mulier taceat de mulierel.
    </p>
    <p>
      233. It betrays corruption of the instincts&mdash;apart from the fact that
      it betrays bad taste&mdash;when a woman refers to Madame Roland, or Madame
      de Stael, or Monsieur George Sand, as though something were proved thereby
      in favour of "woman as she is." Among men, these are the three comical
      women as they are&mdash;nothing more!&mdash;and just the best involuntary
      counter-arguments against feminine emancipation and autonomy.
    </p>
    <p>
      234. Stupidity in the kitchen; woman as cook; the terrible thoughtlessness
      with which the feeding of the family and the master of the house is
      managed! Woman does not understand what food means, and she insists on
      being cook! If woman had been a thinking creature, she should certainly,
      as cook for thousands of years, have discovered the most important
      physiological facts, and should likewise have got possession of the
      healing art! Through bad female cooks&mdash;through the entire lack of
      reason in the kitchen&mdash;the development of mankind has been longest
      retarded and most interfered with: even today matters are very little
      better. A word to High School girls.
    </p>
    <p>
      235. There are turns and casts of fancy, there are sentences, little
      handfuls of words, in which a whole culture, a whole society suddenly
      crystallises itself. Among these is the incidental remark of Madame de
      Lambert to her son: "MON AMI, NE VOUS PERMETTEZ JAMAIS QUE DES FOLIES, QUI
      VOUS FERONT GRAND PLAISIR"&mdash;the motherliest and wisest remark, by the
      way, that was ever addressed to a son.
    </p>
    <p>
      236. I have no doubt that every noble woman will oppose what Dante and
      Goethe believed about woman&mdash;the former when he sang, "ELLA GUARDAVA
      SUSO, ED IO IN LEI," and the latter when he interpreted it, "the eternally
      feminine draws us ALOFT"; for THIS is just what she believes of the
      eternally masculine.
    </p>
    <p>
      237. SEVEN APOPHTHEGMS FOR WOMEN
    </p>
    <p>
      How the longest ennui flees, When a man comes to our knees!
    </p>
    <p>
      Age, alas! and science staid, Furnish even weak virtue aid.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sombre garb and silence meet: Dress for every dame&mdash;discreet.
    </p>
    <p>
      Whom I thank when in my bliss? God!&mdash;and my good tailoress!
    </p>
    <p>
      Young, a flower-decked cavern home; Old, a dragon thence doth roam.
    </p>
    <p>
      Noble title, leg that's fine, Man as well: Oh, were HE mine!
    </p>
    <p>
      Speech in brief and sense in mass&mdash;Slippery for the jenny-ass!
    </p>
    <p>
      237A. Woman has hitherto been treated by men like birds, which, losing
      their way, have come down among them from an elevation: as something
      delicate, fragile, wild, strange, sweet, and animating&mdash;but as
      something also which must be cooped up to prevent it flying away.
    </p>
    <p>
      238. To be mistaken in the fundamental problem of "man and woman," to deny
      here the profoundest antagonism and the necessity for an eternally hostile
      tension, to dream here perhaps of equal rights, equal training, equal
      claims and obligations: that is a TYPICAL sign of shallow-mindedness; and
      a thinker who has proved himself shallow at this dangerous spot&mdash;shallow
      in instinct!&mdash;may generally be regarded as suspicious, nay more, as
      betrayed, as discovered; he will probably prove too "short" for all
      fundamental questions of life, future as well as present, and will be
      unable to descend into ANY of the depths. On the other hand, a man who has
      depth of spirit as well as of desires, and has also the depth of
      benevolence which is capable of severity and harshness, and easily
      confounded with them, can only think of woman as ORIENTALS do: he must
      conceive of her as a possession, as confinable property, as a being
      predestined for service and accomplishing her mission therein&mdash;he
      must take his stand in this matter upon the immense rationality of Asia,
      upon the superiority of the instinct of Asia, as the Greeks did formerly;
      those best heirs and scholars of Asia&mdash;who, as is well known, with
      their INCREASING culture and amplitude of power, from Homer to the time of
      Pericles, became gradually STRICTER towards woman, in short, more
      Oriental. HOW necessary, HOW logical, even HOW humanely desirable this
      was, let us consider for ourselves!
    </p>
    <p>
      239. The weaker sex has in no previous age been treated with so much
      respect by men as at present&mdash;this belongs to the tendency and
      fundamental taste of democracy, in the same way as disrespectfulness to
      old age&mdash;what wonder is it that abuse should be immediately made of
      this respect? They want more, they learn to make claims, the tribute of
      respect is at last felt to be well-nigh galling; rivalry for rights,
      indeed actual strife itself, would be preferred: in a word, woman is
      losing modesty. And let us immediately add that she is also losing taste.
      She is unlearning to FEAR man: but the woman who "unlearns to fear"
      sacrifices her most womanly instincts. That woman should venture forward
      when the fear-inspiring quality in man&mdash;or more definitely, the MAN
      in man&mdash;is no longer either desired or fully developed, is reasonable
      enough and also intelligible enough; what is more difficult to understand
      is that precisely thereby&mdash;woman deteriorates. This is what is
      happening nowadays: let us not deceive ourselves about it! Wherever the
      industrial spirit has triumphed over the military and aristocratic spirit,
      woman strives for the economic and legal independence of a clerk: "woman
      as clerkess" is inscribed on the portal of the modern society which is in
      course of formation. While she thus appropriates new rights, aspires to be
      "master," and inscribes "progress" of woman on her flags and banners, the
      very opposite realises itself with terrible obviousness: WOMAN
      RETROGRADES. Since the French Revolution the influence of woman in Europe
      has DECLINED in proportion as she has increased her rights and claims; and
      the "emancipation of woman," insofar as it is desired and demanded by
      women themselves (and not only by masculine shallow-pates), thus proves to
      be a remarkable symptom of the increased weakening and deadening of the
      most womanly instincts. There is STUPIDITY in this movement, an almost
      masculine stupidity, of which a well-reared woman&mdash;who is always a
      sensible woman&mdash;might be heartily ashamed. To lose the intuition as
      to the ground upon which she can most surely achieve victory; to neglect
      exercise in the use of her proper weapons; to let-herself-go before man,
      perhaps even "to the book," where formerly she kept herself in control and
      in refined, artful humility; to neutralize with her virtuous audacity
      man's faith in a VEILED, fundamentally different ideal in woman, something
      eternally, necessarily feminine; to emphatically and loquaciously dissuade
      man from the idea that woman must be preserved, cared for, protected, and
      indulged, like some delicate, strangely wild, and often pleasant domestic
      animal; the clumsy and indignant collection of everything of the nature of
      servitude and bondage which the position of woman in the hitherto existing
      order of society has entailed and still entails (as though slavery were a
      counter-argument, and not rather a condition of every higher culture, of
      every elevation of culture):&mdash;what does all this betoken, if not a
      disintegration of womanly instincts, a defeminising? Certainly, there are
      enough of idiotic friends and corrupters of woman among the learned asses
      of the masculine sex, who advise woman to defeminize herself in this
      manner, and to imitate all the stupidities from which "man" in Europe,
      European "manliness," suffers,&mdash;who would like to lower woman to
      "general culture," indeed even to newspaper reading and meddling with
      politics. Here and there they wish even to make women into free spirits
      and literary workers: as though a woman without piety would not be
      something perfectly obnoxious or ludicrous to a profound and godless man;&mdash;almost
      everywhere her nerves are being ruined by the most morbid and dangerous
      kind of music (our latest German music), and she is daily being made more
      hysterical and more incapable of fulfilling her first and last function,
      that of bearing robust children. They wish to "cultivate" her in general
      still more, and intend, as they say, to make the "weaker sex" STRONG by
      culture: as if history did not teach in the most emphatic manner that the
      "cultivating" of mankind and his weakening&mdash;that is to say, the
      weakening, dissipating, and languishing of his FORCE OF WILL&mdash;have
      always kept pace with one another, and that the most powerful and
      influential women in the world (and lastly, the mother of Napoleon) had
      just to thank their force of will&mdash;and not their schoolmasters&mdash;for
      their power and ascendancy over men. That which inspires respect in woman,
      and often enough fear also, is her NATURE, which is more "natural" than
      that of man, her genuine, carnivora-like, cunning flexibility, her
      tiger-claws beneath the glove, her NAIVETE in egoism, her untrainableness
      and innate wildness, the incomprehensibleness, extent, and deviation of
      her desires and virtues. That which, in spite of fear, excites one's
      sympathy for the dangerous and beautiful cat, "woman," is that she seems
      more afflicted, more vulnerable, more necessitous of love, and more
      condemned to disillusionment than any other creature. Fear and sympathy it
      is with these feelings that man has hitherto stood in the presence of
      woman, always with one foot already in tragedy, which rends while it
      delights&mdash;What? And all that is now to be at an end? And the
      DISENCHANTMENT of woman is in progress? The tediousness of woman is slowly
      evolving? Oh Europe! Europe! We know the horned animal which was always
      most attractive to thee, from which danger is ever again threatening thee!
      Thy old fable might once more become "history"&mdash;an immense stupidity
      might once again overmaster thee and carry thee away! And no God concealed
      beneath it&mdash;no! only an "idea," a "modern idea"!
    </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
