<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Preface</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Preface</h2>
			
    <p>
      SUPPOSING that Truth is a woman&mdash;what then? Is there not ground for
      suspecting that all philosophers, in so far as they have been dogmatists,
      have failed to understand women&mdash;that the terrible seriousness and
      clumsy importunity with which they have usually paid their addresses to
      Truth, have been unskilled and unseemly methods for winning a woman?
      Certainly she has never allowed herself to be won; and at present every
      kind of dogma stands with sad and discouraged mien&mdash;IF, indeed, it
      stands at all! For there are scoffers who maintain that it has fallen,
      that all dogma lies on the ground&mdash;nay more, that it is at its last
      gasp. But to speak seriously, there are good grounds for hoping that all
      dogmatizing in philosophy, whatever solemn, whatever conclusive and
      decided airs it has assumed, may have been only a noble puerilism and
      tyronism; and probably the time is at hand when it will be once and again
      understood WHAT has actually sufficed for the basis of such imposing and
      absolute philosophical edifices as the dogmatists have hitherto reared:
      perhaps some popular superstition of immemorial time (such as the
      soul-superstition, which, in the form of subject- and ego-superstition,
      has not yet ceased doing mischief): perhaps some play upon words, a
      deception on the part of grammar, or an audacious generalization of very
      restricted, very personal, very human&mdash;all-too-human facts. The
      philosophy of the dogmatists, it is to be hoped, was only a promise for
      thousands of years afterwards, as was astrology in still earlier times, in
      the service of which probably more labour, gold, acuteness, and patience
      have been spent than on any actual science hitherto: we owe to it, and to
      its "super-terrestrial" pretensions in Asia and Egypt, the grand style of
      architecture. It seems that in order to inscribe themselves upon the heart
      of humanity with everlasting claims, all great things have first to wander
      about the earth as enormous and awe-inspiring caricatures: dogmatic
      philosophy has been a caricature of this kind&mdash;for instance, the
      Vedanta doctrine in Asia, and Platonism in Europe. Let us not be
      ungrateful to it, although it must certainly be confessed that the worst,
      the most tiresome, and the most dangerous of errors hitherto has been a
      dogmatist error&mdash;namely, Plato's invention of Pure Spirit and the
      Good in Itself. But now when it has been surmounted, when Europe, rid of
      this nightmare, can again draw breath freely and at least enjoy a
      healthier&mdash;sleep, we, WHOSE DUTY IS WAKEFULNESS ITSELF, are the heirs
      of all the strength which the struggle against this error has fostered. It
      amounted to the very inversion of truth, and the denial of the PERSPECTIVE&mdash;the
      fundamental condition&mdash;of life, to speak of Spirit and the Good as
      Plato spoke of them; indeed one might ask, as a physician: "How did such a
      malady attack that finest product of antiquity, Plato? Had the wicked
      Socrates really corrupted him? Was Socrates after all a corrupter of
      youths, and deserved his hemlock?" But the struggle against Plato, or&mdash;to
      speak plainer, and for the "people"&mdash;the struggle against the
      ecclesiastical oppression of millenniums of Christianity (FOR CHRISTIANITY
      IS PLATONISM FOR THE "PEOPLE"), produced in Europe a magnificent tension
      of soul, such as had not existed anywhere previously; with such a tensely
      strained bow one can now aim at the furthest goals. As a matter of fact,
      the European feels this tension as a state of distress, and twice attempts
      have been made in grand style to unbend the bow: once by means of
      Jesuitism, and the second time by means of democratic enlightenment&mdash;which,
      with the aid of liberty of the press and newspaper-reading, might, in
      fact, bring it about that the spirit would not so easily find itself in
      "distress"! (The Germans invented gunpowder&mdash;all credit to them! but
      they again made things square&mdash;they invented printing.) But we, who
      are neither Jesuits, nor democrats, nor even sufficiently Germans, we GOOD
      EUROPEANS, and free, VERY free spirits&mdash;we have it still, all the
      distress of spirit and all the tension of its bow! And perhaps also the
      arrow, the duty, and, who knows? THE GOAL TO AIM AT....
    </p>
    <p>
      Sils Maria Upper Engadine, June, 1885.
    </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
